--- PAGE 1 ---

Table 1: Recommended buffers and solutions
For coupling of nucleic For RNA applications For coupling of proteins
acids and other molecules
Binding and washing Solution A: PBS buffer pH 7.4
Dynabeads™ M-280 Streptavidin (B&W) Buffer (2X): DEPC-treated 0.1 M NaOH These buffers can also be
10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5) DEPC-treated 0.05 M NaCl used for your application
1 mM EDTA if needed:
Solution B:
2 M NaCl PBS/BSA (PBS, pH 7.4
DEPC-treated 0.1 M NaCl
Catalog Nos. 11205D, 11206D, 60210 Store at 2 to 8˚C containing 0.01% [w/v]
Publication No. MAN0014017 Rev. B.0
BSA)
PBST (PBS pH 7.4 contain-
ing 0.01% [v/v] Tween™-20)
Product contents Required materials
The salt concentration and pH (typically 5–9) of the chosen binding/washing buffers can be varied
• DynaMag™ Magnet (See depending on the type of molecule to be immobilized. Beads with immobilized molecules are
stable in common buffers.
Cat. No. Volume thermofisher.com/magnets for
11205D 2 mL recommendations on magnets Both the size of the molecule to be immobilized and the biotinylation procedure
appropriate for manual or will affect the binding capacity. The capacity for biotinylated molecules depends on
11206D 10 mL
automated protocols) steric availability and charge interaction between bead and molecule and between
60210 100 mL
• Mixing device with tilting and molecules. There are two or three biotin binding sites available for each streptavidin
rotation (e.g. HulaMixer™ Sample molecule on the surface of the bead after immobilization.
Dynabeads™ M-280 Streptavidin Mixer) • Optimize the quantity of beads used for each individual application by titration.
contains 10 mg (~6–7 × 108) of magnetic
beads/mL in phosphate buffered saline • Buffers and Solutions (see Table 1) • Use up to two-fold excess of the binding capacity of the biotinylated molecule to
(PBS) pH 7.4, with 0.1% bovine serum • For biotinylation details, download saturate streptavidin.
albumin (BSA) and 0.02% sodium azide the Molecular Probes Handbook • Binding efficiency can be determined by comparing molecule concentration
as preservatives. from thermofisher.com/handbook before and after coupling.
Product description General guidelines Protocol
Dynabeads™ M-280 Streptavidin are • Keep the tube on the magnet for 2 Recommended washing buffers
ideal for numerous applications, min to ensure that all the beads are
• Nucleic acid applications: 1X B&W Buffer (see Table 1 for recipe). Dilute to 1X
including purification of proteins collected on the tube wall.
B&W Buffer with distilled water.
and nucleic acids, protein interaction
• For diluted samples, increase the
studies, immunoprecipitation, immuno- • Antibody/protein applications: PBS, pH 7.4.
incubation time or isolate in smaller
assays, phage display, biopanning, drug batches using the same beads in each Wash Dynabeads™ magnetic beads
screening and cell isolation.
batch.
Calculate the amount of beads required based on their binding capacity (see Table 2),
Add the beads to a sample containing
• Avoid air bubbles during pipetting. and transfer the beads to a new tube.
biotinylated molecules, e.g. peptides,
• Free biotin in the sample will reduce 1. Resuspend the beads in the vial (i.e. vortex for >30 sec, or tilt and rotate for 5 min).
proteins, antibodies, sugars, lectins,
the binding capacity of the beads.
oligonucleotides, DNA/RNA. During 2. Transfer the desired volume of beads to a tube.
A disposable separation column
a short incubation, the biotinylated 3. Add an equal volume of Washing buffer, or at least 1 mL, and mix (vortex for
or a spin column will remove
molecule will bind to the beads. Separate 5 sec, or keep on a roller for at least 5 min).
unincorporated biotin.
the molecule-bead capture, washing,
4. Place the tube on a magnet for 1 min and discard the supernatant.
and detection can be optimized for • For some applications it can be
manual or automated use. With indirect an advantage to add a detergent 5. Remove the tube from the magnet and resuspend the washed beads in the same
capture, mix the biotinylated molecule such as 0.01–0.1% Tween™ 20 to the volume of washing buffer as the initial volume of beads taken from the vial (step 2).
with the sample to capture the molecule- washing/binding buffers to reduce
Table 2: Typical binding capacities for one mg of Dynabeads™ magnetic beads.
target complex before adding the beads. non-specific binding.
Indirect target capture is an advantage • Run the PCR with limiting Biotinylated target Binding/mg
when molecule-target kinetics are slow, concentrations of biotinylated Free Biotin (pmol) 650–900
affinity is weak, molecule concentration primer, or remove free biotinylated
Biotinylated peptides (pmol) ~200
is low, or molecule-target binding primer by ultrafiltration,
requires optimal molecule orientation microdialysis or other clean-up Biotinylated antibody (µg) ~10
and true liquid-phase kinetics. protocols (PCR clean-up products are ds DNA (µg) * ~10
available from thermofisher.com). Ss oligonucleotides (pmol) * ~200
* Oligonucleotides and DNA fragments
For oligonucleotides, capacity is inversely related to molecule size (number of bases). Reduced binding capacity
for large DNA fragments may be due to steric hindrance.
For research use only. Not for use in diagnostic procedures.

--- PAGE 2 ---

Dynabeads™ magnetic beads for RNA manipulation Automation
As Dynabeads™ Streptavidin are not supplied in RNase-free solutions, perform the Magnetic separation and handling using Dynabeads™ magnetic beads can easily
following steps after washing for RNA applications: be automated on a wide variety of liquid handling platforms. Dynabeads™
1. Wash the beads twice in Solution A for 2 min. Use the same volume (or larger) of MyOne™ Streptavidin T1 share similar properties to Dynabeads™ M-280
Solution A as the initial volume of beads taken from the vial. Streptavidin but are smaller, making them ideal for automation applications
due to their small size, low sedimentation rate and high magnetic mobility.
2. Wash the beads once in Solution B. Use the same volume of beads as in step 5.
Selected protocols are available at thermofisher.com/automation.
3. Resuspend the beads in Solution B.
The beads are now ready to be coated with the biotinylated molecule of your choice. Description of materials
Immobilization protocol Dynabeads™ Streptavidin are uniform, superparamagnetic beads of 2.8 µm in
Wash the Dynabeads™ magnetic beads according to “Wash Dynabeads™ magnetic diameter with a streptavidin monolayer covalently coupled to the surface. This
layer ensures negligible streptavidin leakage while the lack of excess adsorbed
beads” section before use.
streptavidin ensures batch consistency and reproducibility of results.
1. Add the biotinylated molecule to the washed beads.
2. Incubate for 15–30 min at room temperature with gentle rotation of the tube. Related products
3. Place the tube in a magnet for 2–3 min and discard the supernatant.
4. Wash the coated beads 3–4 times in washing buffer. Product Cat. No.
5. Resuspend to desired concentration in a suitable buffer for your downstream use. Dynabeads™ M-270 Streptavidin 65305
Here are some examples of immobilization protocols for specific applications. Dynabeads™ MyOne™ Streptavidin C1 65001
Dynabeads™ MyOne™ Streptavidin T1 65601
Immobilize nucleic acids
Dynabeads™ Kit kilobaseBINDER™ 60101
1. Resuspend beads in 2X B&W Buffer to a final concentration of 5 µg/µL (twice
original volume). DynaMag™-2 Magnet 12321D
2. To immobilize, add an equal volume of the biotinylated DNA/RNA in distilled HulaMixer™ Sample Mixer 15920D
water to dilute the NaCl concentration in the 2 B&W Buffer from 2 M to 1 M for
REF on labels is the symbol for catalog number.
optimal binding.
3. Incubate for 15 min at room temperature using gentle rotation. Incubation time
Important licensing information
depends on the nucleic acid length: short oligonucleotides (<30 bases) require
max. 10 min. DNA fragments up to 1 kb require 15 min. These products may be covered by one or more Limited Use Label Licenses.
By use of these products, you accept the terms and conditions of all applicable
4. Separate the biotinylated DNA/RNA coated beads with a magnet for 2–3 min.
Limited Use Label Licenses.
5. Wash 2–3 times with a 1X B&W Buffer.
Manufactured by Thermo Fisher Scientific AS, Ullernchausseen 52 PO Box 114,
6. Resuspend to the desired concentration. Binding is now complete. Resuspend
Smestad, Olso, Norway N-0379 and by Thermo Fisher Scientific Baltics UAB,
the beads with the immobilized DNA/RNA fragment in a buffer with low salt
V.A. Graiciuno 8, LT-02241 Vilnius, Lithuania. Thermo Fisher Scientific AS and
concentration, suitable for downstream applications.
Thermo Fisher Scientific Baltics UAB comply with the Quality System Standards
Immobilize antibodies/proteins ISO 9001 and ISO 13485.
1. Incubate the beads and biotinylated antibodies in PBS for 30 min at room Limited product warranty
temperature using gentle rotation.
Life Technologies Corporation and/or its affiliate(s) warrant their products as
2. Separate the antibody-coated beads with a magnet for 2–3 min.
set forth in the Life Technologies' General Terms and Conditions of Sale found
3. Wash the coated beads 4–5 times in PBS containing 0.1% BSA. on Life Technologies' website at www.thermofisher.com/us/en/home/global/
4. Resuspend to the desired concentration for your application. terms-and-conditions.html. If you have any questions, please contact Life
Technologies at www.thermofisher.com/support.
Corporate entity: Life Technologies | Carlsbad, CA 92008 USA | Toll Free in USA 1.800.955.6288
©2018 Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc. All rights reserved. All trademarks are the property of Thermo Fisher Scientific and its
subsidiaries unless otherwise specified.Tween is a registered trademark of Croda Americas, PLC
DISCLAIMER: TO THE EXTENT ALLOWED BY LAW, LIFE TECHNOLOGIES AND/OR ITS AFFILIATE(S) WILL NOT BE LIABLE FOR SPECIAL,
INCIDENTAL, INDIRECT, PUNITIVE, MULTIPLE OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES IN CONNECTION WITH OR ARISING FROM THIS DOCUMENT,
INCLUDING YOUR USE OF IT.
For support visit thermofisher.com/support or
email techsupport@lifetech.com
thermofisher.com
14 June 2018