--- PAGE 1 ---

HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Mol Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 July 01.
Published in final edited form as:
Mol Microbiol. 2017 July ; 105(1): 139–157. doi:10.1111/mmi.13693.
Staphylococcus aureus nitric oxide synthase (saNOS)
modulates aerobic respiratory metabolism and cell physiology
Austin B. Mogen1, Ronan K. Carroll2, Kimberly L. James1, Genevy Lima1,a, Dona Silva1,b,
Jeffrey A. Culver3,4, Christopher Petucci3,4, Lindsey N. Shaw5, and Kelly C. Rice1,*
1Department of Microbiology and Cell Science, IFAS, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL,
32611-0700
2Department of Biological Sciences, Ohio University, Athens, Ohio, 45701
3Metabolomics Core, Sanford Burnham Prebys Medical Discovery Institute, Orlando, FL, 32827
4Southeast Center for Integrated Metabolomics, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, 32611
5Department of Cell Biology, Microbiology and Molecular Biology, University of South Florida,
Tampa, FL, 33620-5150
Summary
Nitric oxide (NO) is generated from arginine and oxygen via NO synthase (NOS). Staphylococcus
aureus NOS (saNOS) has previously been shown to affect virulence and resistance to exogenous
oxidative stress, yet the exact mechanism is unknown. Herein, we report a previously-undescribed
role of saNOS in S. aureus aerobic physiology. Specifically, aerobic S. aureus nos mutant cultures
presented with elevated endogenous reactive oxygen species (ROS) and superoxide levels, as well
as increased membrane potential, increased respiratory dehydrogenase activity, and slightly
elevated oxygen consumption. Elevated ROS levels in the nos mutant likely resulted from altered
respiratory function, as inhibition of NADH dehydrogenase brought ROS levels back to wild-type
levels. These results indicate that, in addition to its recently-reported role in regulating the switch
to nitrate-based respiration during low-oxygen growth, saNOS also plays a modulatory role during
aerobic respiration. Multiple transcriptional changes were also observed in the nos mutant,
including elevated expression of genes associated with oxidative/nitrosative stress, anaerobic
respiration, and lactate metabolism. Targeted metabolomics revealed decreased cellular lactate
levels, and altered levels of TCA cycle intermediates, the latter of which may be related to
decreased aconitase activity. Collectively, these findings demonstrate a key contribution of saNOS
to S. aureus aerobic respiratory metabolism.
Graphical Abstract
*Corresponding author: Department of Microbiology and Cell Science, IFAS, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, 32611-0700; Tel:
352-392-1192; Fax: 352-392-5922; kcrice@ufl.edu.
aCurrent address: Ross University of Veterinary Medicine, Iselin, New Jersey 08830
bCurrent address: University of Central Florida, Orlando, FL 32816
Author Contributions
Conception and design of this study: ABM, KCR; Data acquisition, analysis, and interpretation: ABM, RKC, KLJ, GL, DS, JC, CP,
LNS, KCR; Writing of the manuscript: ABM, RKC, KLJ, CP, LNS, KCR.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

--- PAGE 2 ---

Mogen et al. Page 2
Keywords
Staphylococcus aureus; bacterial nitric oxide synthase; reactive oxygen species; cell respiration;
RNAseq; metabolomics
Introduction
Nitric oxide synthase (NOS) enzymes are present in all domains of life and are critical for a
myriad of biological processes. A great deal of research has been completed on various
mammalian NOS isotypes, with these proteins contributing to regulation of blood pressure,
nervous system signaling, protection against pathogens, and regulation of respiration,
respectively (Sudhamsu & Crane, 2009, Crane et al., 2010, Forstermann & Sessa, 2012,
Crawford, 2006, Alderton et al., 2001, Yun et al., 1996, Lipton, 2001, Brown, 1995, Giulivi
et al., 2006). Mammalian NOS proteins contain both oxygenase and reductase domains that
catalyze the two-step oxidation of L-arginine to nitric oxide (NO) and L-citrulline (Alderton
et al., 2001, Griffith & Stuehr, 1995). Alternatively, most bacterial NOS enzymes only
contain an oxygenase domain and require a separate cellular reductase partner (Adak et al.,
2002b, Adak et al., 2002a, Gusarov et al., 2008). Bacterial NOS proteins are primarily found
in Gram-positive genera including Deinococcus, Streptomyces, Bacillus, and
Staphylococcus (Sudhamsu & Crane, 2009). NO is a highly reactive free radical gas
[reviewed in (Toledo & Augusto, 2012)], which at low concentrations can act as a signaling
molecule (Arora et al., 2015, Ramirez-Mata et al., 2014), and can also promote nitrosative
stress when NO levels are high (Poole, 2005, van der Heijden et al., 2015, Kim et al., 2015,
Aribi et al., 2015). Non-organic targets of NO include molecular oxygen (O ) (Czapski &
2
Goldstein, 1995, Wink et al., 1993), superoxide (O −) (Czapski & Goldstein, 1995), and
2
various lipid and protein-derived radicals (Rubbo et al., 2000, O’Donnell et al., 1997, Lam et
al., 2008). NO also interacts with multiple cellular targets such as lipid membranes (Moller
et al., 2007), heme cofactors (Winger et al., 2007, Stone et al., 1995, Gardner et al., 1998,
Olson et al., 2004, Brown, 1995, Boveris et al., 2000), iron-sulfur clusters (Crack et al.,
2011, Tinberg et al., 2010), and cysteine thiols (Gusarov & Nudler, 2012, Keshive et al.,
1996), while NO-derived molecular intermediates can also indirectly nitrate protein tyrosine
residues (Radi, 2013, Radi, 2004, Wong et al., 2001). This broad range of targets likely
contributes to the wide spectrum of NOS-derived NO activity.
Mol Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 July 01.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

--- PAGE 3 ---

Mogen et al. Page 3
S. aureus is a highly versatile pathogen, notorious for developing resistance to multiple
antibiotics and for its ability to cause a wide array of infections (Nizet, 2007, Otto, 2010,
Deurenberg & Stobberingh, 2008, Plata et al., 2009, Slipczuk et al., 2013). This success is
due in part to its diverse and adaptive metabolism, predicted to be one of the most complex
in terms of estimated metabolite numbers (Liebeke & Lalk, 2014). Multiple studies
implicate a direct link between S. aureus metabolic activity, virulence, survival, and
persistence, making the determination of metabolic mechanisms critical for the development
of novel treatments (Somerville & Proctor, 2009, Chatterjee et al., 2009, Zhu et al., 2009).
Exponential-phase growth on glucose, when O is abundant, causes TCA cycle suppression
2
and induces acetate fermentation (Collins & Lascelles, 1962, Somerville et al., 2002,
Somerville et al., 2003, Strasters & Winkler, 1963). Once glucose is limited in the system,
the cells switch to aerobic acetate respiration (Somerville et al., 2003). In contrast, amino
acid catabolism in S. aureus is driven by metabolic intermediates shuttled through the TCA
cycle to generate reducing equivalents necessary for aerobic respiration (Somerville et al.,
2002). Aerobic respiration in S. aureus is driven in part by two NADH: menaquinone
oxidoreductases (Schurig-Briccio et al., 2014), but when normal respiratory function is
disrupted, S. aureus can also use lactate via the lactate quinone oxidoreductase (Lqo) (Fuller
et al., 2011).
A potential target for new drug development is the staphylococcal NOS (saNOS) enzyme. S.
aureus mutants lacking nos showed decreased virulence in both an ex vivo neutrophil model,
and two different murine infection models (Sapp et al., 2014, van Sorge et al., 2013). In fact,
drug discovery efforts against saNOS have shown effectiveness at inhibiting strains of
methicillin resistant S. aureus (Holden et al., 2015b, Holden et al., 2013, Holden et al.,
2015a). Although saNOS has been implicated in resistance to exogenous oxidative stress,
antimicrobials, and heme stress in vitro (Gusarov et al., 2009, Vaish & Singh, 2013, van
Sorge et al., 2013, Surdel et al., 2016), the exact mechanism by which it exerts these effects
on the cell is not well understood. Additionally, it is possible that saNOS protects against
endogenous ROS generated as a by-product of aerobic respiration (Minghetti & Gennis,
1988, Messner & Imlay, 1999, Messner & Imlay, 2002). In this current study, we
investigated the contribution of saNOS to S. aureus aerobic physiology and metabolism in
the absence of exogenous stress. These experiments reveal that saNOS contributes to the
metabolic versatility of S. aureus, as a nos mutant displayed alterations in aerobic respiratory
function which contribute to increased endogenous ROS levels. Furthermore, RNAseq and
quantitative metabolomics, as well as analysis of aconitase activity, suggests that in the
absence of saNOS, TCA cycle activity is altered and alternative metabolic pathways are
employed. These results demonstrate that, in addition to its recently-reported role in
mediating a switch to nitrate-based respiration during microaerobic growth (Kinkel et al.,
2016), saNOS also has a key role in modulating S. aureus aerobic respiratory metabolism.
Mol Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 July 01.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

--- PAGE 4 ---

Mogen et al. Page 4
Results
saNOS affects cell shape and optical density (OD) properties during aerobic respiratory
growth
Although many research groups have studied saNOS with a focus on its relevance during
infection (Vaish & Singh, 2013, van Sorge et al., 2013, Sapp et al., 2014), little is known
about the potential effects of this enzyme on S. aureus physiology in the absence of
exogenous stress. In our attempts to optimize a formerly described (Gusarov & Nudler,
2005) oxidative stress assay, we observed that our previously-published S. aureus nos::erm
mutant (Sapp et al., 2014) consistently displayed a decreased optical density (OD )
600
phenotype during mid-late exponential growth phase when grown aerobically in either Luria
Broth (LB) media lacking glucose (data not shown) or in tryptic soy broth (TSB) lacking
glucose (TSB-G; Fig. 1A). This OD phenotype did not appear to be a result of decreased
600
viability of the UAMS-1 nos mutant, as corresponding CFU/ml counts were comparable to
the wild-type and complement strains during this phase of growth (Fig. 1B). To verify that
loss of saNOS-derived NO production was responsible for the nos mutant OD phenotype,
600
chemical NO donor (DPTA NONOate) was added to nos mutant TSB-G cultures at the time
of inoculation (Fig. S1A–B). As expected, exogenously added NO complemented the OD
600
phenotype of the nos mutant to near wild-type values (Fig. S1A) without affecting cell
viability (Fig. S1B).
Interestingly, the nos mutant OD phenotype appeared to be specific to aerobic growth in
600
media lacking glucose, a growth condition in S. aureus that promotes exponential-phase
aerobic respiration fueled by amino acid catabolism and the TCA cycle (Somerville et al.,
2002). When grown aerobically in TSB containing 14 mM glucose (TSB+G), a growth
condition that promotes exponential-phase fermentation of glucose to acetate and repression
of TCA cycle activity (Somerville et al., 2002, Somerville et al., 2003), OD and CFU/ml
600
growth curves of the wild-type, nos mutant, and complement strains were comparable to
each other (Figs. 1C–D). To confirm that this OD effect was not a phenomenon specific to
the clinical MSSA strain UAMS-1, aerobic TSB-G growth curves were also completed in
LAC-13C, a plasmid-cured derivative of community-acquired methicillin resistant S. aureus
(CA-MRSA) strain LAC (Fey et al., 2013, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
2003), and its isogenic nos::erm mutant (Figs. S1C–D). Similar to the UAMS-1 nos mutant,
a decreased OD phenotype was observed in the nos mutant when compared to the
600
LAC-13C wild-type strain (Fig. S1C). Unlike the UAMS-1 nos mutant (Fig. 1B), slightly
decreased CFU/ml values were observed in the LAC-13C nos mutant relative to the parental
strain (Fig. S1D).
To determine if alterations in cell morphology accounted for the OD phenotype observed
600
in the nos mutant, scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was performed on cells isolated
from UAMS-1 wild-type, nos mutant, and complement strains grown to stationary phase (6
hours) in TSB-G. SEM analysis revealed that the nos mutant cells appeared to be elongated
relative to wild-type and nos complement cells (Fig. 2A–C). This qualitative observation
was confirmed by measuring the length of each whole cell (from its longest point) in 12–14
fields of view per strain (Fig. 2D), which verified that the nos mutant cells were significantly
Mol Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 July 01.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

--- PAGE 5 ---

Mogen et al. Page 5
longer than those of the wild-type and complement strains (P <0.05 Holm-Sidak test; Fig.
2D).
RNAseq profiling of the nos mutant transcriptome
The altered cell shape and OD phenotype observed in the nos mutant during aerobic
600
respiratory growth suggested that saNOS may affect unknown aspects of S. aureus
physiology. Therefore, RNAseq was completed using the IonTorrent PGM platform on RNA
isolated from late exponential growth phase (4 hours growth) aerobic TSB-G cultures of
UAMS-1 and its isogenic nos mutant (the time point at which the OD values of wild-type
600
and mutant start to diverge). Expression changes (≥ 2-fold) in the nos mutant were observed
for 403 genes (Supplemental Table S1). Strikingly, expression of multiple genes associated
with oxidative and nitrosative stress resistance (trxA, SAR1984, SAR1492, ahpF, hemA,
msrA1, qoxC, ldh1, hmp, and scdA) were altered in the nos mutant at 4 hours growth (Fig. 3
and Table S1). In addition, several metabolic genes, including those associated with
anaerobic metabolism/fermentation (pfl, narG, SAR2013, SAR2210, and ldh2), pyruvate
and carbohydrate metabolism (pyk, lac operon, nanA, fda, gap, and pgi), amino acid
metabolism (SAR1143, otc, SAR1836, lysA), and cytochrome biosynthesis/assembly (cta
and qox operons), were all expressed at higher levels in the nos mutant. Other notable
expression changes in the nos mutant included highly down-regulated expression of purine
(pur; −3.2 to −77.1 fold) and pyrimidine (pyr; −2.5 to −7.5 fold) biosynthesis operons, as
well as decreased expression of multiple virulence genes (geh, capG, and dltD), ribosome
and translation machinery genes (rpm, rps, rbf, rpl, infA, and gidB), and components of the
fatty acid degradation (fad) operon. Furthermore, 88 hypothetical proteins and 40 predicted
small, non-coding sRNAs presented with altered expression (Fig. 3).
RNAseq data for a subset of the differentially-expressed genes was confirmed by
quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR) on RNA isolated from wild-type, nos mutant, and
complement strains (Supplemental Table S2). Fold-change expression levels were restored
to near-wild-type levels in the nos complement strain for all tested genes, except for
SAR2006, which encodes an NAD synthetase and is divergently transcribed from the nos
gene (SAR2007). Analysis of the RNAseq reads aligned to SAR2006 in the nos mutant
suggested that this divergent transcription originates near the insertion site of the
erythromycin cassette in the nos gene (located 232 bp downstream of the nos start codon).
However, all other nos mutant phenotypes reported herein were complemented by supplying
the nos gene in trans on a plasmid, indicating that the increased transcript levels of SAR2006
do not influence the nos mutant phenotypes presented in this study.
Mutation of nos increases intracellular endogenous ROS and oxidative stress
In Bacillus subtilis, B. anthracis, and S. aureus, a hallmark of nos mutation is an increased
sensitivity to exogenous oxidative stress (van Sorge et al., 2013, Sapp et al., 2014, Gusarov
& Nudler, 2005, Shatalin et al., 2008). Although S. aureus is subjected to exogenous sources
of oxidative stress from the host immune system, ROS are also naturally produced during
respiration by the bacterium’s own metabolism. In line with this, the RNAseq data described
above suggested that the nos mutant may be subjected to increased endogenous oxidative
stress. Specifically, multiple genes associated with oxidative stress (msrA1, ahpF, trxA),
Mol Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 July 01.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

--- PAGE 6 ---

Mogen et al. Page 6
heme biosynthesis (hemA), as well as iron storage and iron-sulfur cluster repair (scdA,
SAR1492, SAR1984) presented with increased expression. To determine if the nos mutant
indeed accumulates more intracellular endogenous ROS, cells collected from mid-
exponential (3 hours growth) phase aerobic cultures of wild-type, nos mutant, and nos
complement strains were stained with carboxy-2′,7′-dichlorofluorescein (CM-H
2
DCFDA) a
fluorescent cell-permeable ROS indicator (Jakubowski & Bartosz, 2000, LeBel et al., 1992).
This demonstrated that the nos mutant had significantly (P <0.001 Tukey test) increased
levels of intracellular ROS relative to the wild-type and complement strains in both TSB-G
and TSB+G cultures, conditions that promote and suppress the TCA cycle/aerobic
respiration, respectively (Fig. 4A and S2A). Superoxide, a natural by-product of aerobic
respiration, is likely a major contributor to endogenous ROS within respiring S. aureus cells
(Messner & Imlay, 1999). Therefore, the superoxide specific stain MitoSOX Red (Robinson
et al., 2006) was used to determine if superoxide was altered in the nos mutant when grown
aerobically in TSB-G (Fig. 4B). Similar to the general intracellular ROS levels depicted in
Fig. 4A, nos mutant cells also demonstrated increased intracellular superoxide levels relative
to the wild-type and nos complement strains (Fig. 4B). Given a previous study implicating
B. subtilis NOS-derived NO in the direct reactivation of free cysteine-inhibited catalase
(Gusarov & Nudler, 2005), it is plausible that increased intracellular ROS observed in the S.
aureus nos mutant is an indirect result of impaired catalase activity. To address this, catalase
activity in cytosolic proteins extracted from wild-type, nos mutant, and nos complement
strains grown in aerobic TSB-G cultures was quantified by measuring the amount of
unreacted H O using Amplex Red in the presence of horseradish peroxidase (Zhou et al.,
2 2
1997, Mohanty et al., 1997). As indicated in Fig. 4C, catalase activity was not decreased in
the nos mutant, and in fact was measurably increased relative to wild-type and complement
strains, possibly in response to increased endogenous ROS accumulation. Collectively, these
results demonstrate that, in addition to promoting resistance to exogenous oxidative stress,
saNOS helps curtail the production or accumulation of endogenous ROS during aerobic
growth.
saNOS contributes to aerobic respiratory function
A defined relationship between NO, NOS, and modulation of cell respiration has been well
established in mammals (Giulivi et al., 2006, Parihar et al., 2008a, Larsen et al., 2012).
Furthermore, exogenously added NO has been shown to slow bacterial respiration by
competing with O at the final step of the electron transport chain (Junemann &
2
Wrigglesworth, 1996, Borisov et al., 2004, Butler et al., 2002, McCollister et al., 2011), and
saNOS has been recently reported to mediate the switch to nitrate-based respiration during
microaerobic growth (Kinkel et al., 2016). These published studies, combined with the gene
expression profiles and increased intracellular ROS observed in the nos mutant (Figs. 3–4)
led us to hypothesize that aerobic respiration may also be altered in the nos mutant. To test
this, the membrane potential of wild-type, nos mutant, and complement strains was
measured in aerobic TSB-G cultures using the carbocyanine dye DiOC
2
(3) (3,3′-
diethyloxacarbocyanine iodide) and a previously-described flow-cytometry method (Novo et
al., 1999, Lewis et al., 2015, Shapiro & Nebe-von-Caron, 2004). At 3 hours growth
(corresponding to mid-exponential growth phase), the nos mutant presented with an
increased membrane potential (as reflected by an increased red:green fluorescence ratio)
Mol Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 July 01.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

--- PAGE 7 ---

Mogen et al. Page 7
relative to the wild-type and complement strains (Fig. 5A). Since S. aureus has been
previously shown to inhibit TCA cycle activity (and presumably cell respiration) during
exponential growth in the presence of glucose (Somerville et al., 2002), membrane potential
was also assessed in the wild-type, nos mutant, and complement strains during exponential
growth phase in TSB+G. Interestingly, membrane potential was also increased in TSB+G
cultures of nos mutant relative to wild-type, but the degree of shift was slightly smaller (Fig.
S2B). A chemical NO donor, DPTA NONOate, was also employed in these experiments to
determine if NO complements the membrane potential phenotype of the nos mutant. The
addition of 100 µM DPTA NONOate at time of inoculation of aerobic TSB-G cultures
restored the membrane potential of the nos mutant near to wild-type levels, but had a
minimal effect on the membrane potential of the wild-type strain (Fig. 5A).
Cell respiratory activity in aerobic TSB-G cultures of wild-type, nos mutant, and
complement strains was also measured by staining cells with 4.5 mM 5-cyano-2,3-ditolyl
tetrazolium chloride (CTC), a compound reduced by respiratory dehydrogenases to an
insoluble highly-fluorescent CTC formazan product (Smith & McFeters, 1997). After 3
hours growth (mid-exponential growth phase), increased fluorescence was observed in the
nos mutant relative to the wild-type strain, suggesting that increased respiratory
dehydrogenase activity is occurring in the nos mutant (Fig. 5B). This nos mutant phenotype
was also observed during growth in TSB+G (Fig. S2C), and CTC fluorescence was restored
to wild-type levels under both growth conditions in the complement strain (Fig. S2C and
data not shown). To determine if NO directly complements the nos mutant CTC phenotype,
DPTA NONOate was also added to cultures at time of inoculation, and restored the level of
nos mutant CTC reduction to wild-type levels at 3 hours growth (Fig. 5B). Oxygen
consumption was also measured with a Clark-type electrode in cells from aerobic mid-
exponential phase TSB-G cultures of wild-type, nos mutant, and complement strains (Fig.
5C). Although not statistically significant, the nos mutant had a slightly increased oxygen
consumption rate relative to the wild-type strain, a result corresponding to data recently
reported by (Kinkel et al., 2016). Taken together, these results suggest that saNOS may have
a direct influence on the aerobic respiratory chain upstream of O reduction by the terminal
2
electron acceptor(s).
Inhibition of NADH dehydrogenase limits oxidative stress in a nos mutant
Endogenously produced ROS, such as superoxide, occur naturally during aerobic respiration
when excess electrons incompletely reduce oxygen to superoxide on flavoproteins
(Minghetti & Gennis, 1988, Messner & Imlay, 1999, Messner & Imlay, 2002). To determine
if elevated ROS levels in the nos mutant were due to disruption of proper respiratory
function, an NADH dehydrogenase inhibitor was employed. Thioridizine HCl (TZ)
specifically inhibits NADH dehydrogenase activity and was previously reported to not affect
respiration by alternative electron donors such as succinate, malate, and lactate (Schurig-
Briccio et al., 2014). Addition of TZ to wild-type and nos mutant cultures at time of
inoculation substantially decreased overall ROS levels in aerobically growing TSB-G
cultures (Fig. 6A). While TZ decreased ROS in both wild-type and nos mutant cultures, the
magnitude of this decrease was greater when the nos mutant was treated with the NADH
dehydrogenase inhibitor. Aconitase activity is known to be affected by the direct oxidation
Mol Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 July 01.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

--- PAGE 8 ---

Mogen et al. Page 8
of its [4Fe-4S] clusters by superoxide, and in turn can be used to indirectly measure
oxidative stress in cells (Gardner & Fridovich, 1991, Gardner, 2002). Therefore, aconitase
activity was also determined in aerobic TSB-G cultures of wild-type, nos mutant, and
complement strains by coupling the production of isocitrate to the reduction of NADP+ by
isocitrate dehydrogenase (Rose & O’Connell, 1967). As predicted, the aconitase activity of
the nos mutant was significantly lower than both the wild-type and nos complement strains
(Fig. 6B). However, chemical inhibition of NADH dehydrogenase was not able to restore
aconitase activity in the nos mutant (Fig. 6B), suggesting that reduced aconitase activity is
not entirely a function of increased ROS. Overall, these data suggest that increased
endogenous ROS in the nos mutant is, in part, likely due to altered aerobic respiratory
function.
Loss of saNOS causes significant changes in intracellular and secreted metabolite profiles
As indicated by the RNAseq data described in Fig. 3 and Supplemental Table S4, multiple
genes associated with anaerobic metabolism and/or fermentation were upregulated in the nos
mutant when grown aerobically without glucose, an amino-acid based growth condition that
promotes exponential phase TCA cycle activity and cell respiration. To confirm that the nos
mutant has an altered metabolism relative to wild-type and complement strains in this
growth condition, we performed quantitative targeted metabolomics analysis on 4 hour (late-
exponential) cultures to detect both cellular and secreted metabolites (organic acids, amino
acids, nucleotides) using LC/MS/MS (Table 1 and supplemental figures S3–5). Interestingly,
cellular lactate levels were significantly reduced by 48.5% in the nos mutant relative to the
wild-type and complement strains (Table 1). Furthermore, comparison of the intracellular
organic acid composition of wild-type and nos mutant suggested that metabolites produced
by the right arm of the TCA cycle (citrate, α-ketoglutarate) were decreased in the nos
mutant, whereas metabolites associated with the left arm of the TCA cycle (fumarate,
malate) were increased (Table 1). Specifically, compared to the nos mutant, wild-type cells
showed 30.0% and 53.5% decreases in citrate and α-ketoglutarate levels, respectively;
whereas fumarate and malate levels were increased in the nos mutant by 158.0% and 62.0%,
respectively (Table 1).
Amino acid composition of the wild-type, nos mutant, and complement strains was also
quantified using LC/MS/MS (Fig. S4). Because NOS catalyzes the two-step oxidation of L-
arginine (Arg) to L-citrulline (Ctl) and NO, we expected Ctl levels to be lower in the nos
mutant. Surprisingly, cellular Ctl levels were significantly higher in the nos mutant (Table 1),
whereas Arg levels were similar between wild-type and nos mutant cells (Fig. S4A).
Statistically-significant decreases in nos mutant cellular amino acids were also observed for
glutamate and all branched-chain amino acids (leucine, isoleucine, valine), whereas histidine
levels were significantly increased (Table 1 and Fig. S4A–C). Although not statistically
significant, glutamine and ornithine levels were also decreased in the nos mutant cells
relative to wild-type and complement strains. To determine if redox balance and ATP levels
are altered in the nos mutant during aerobic respiratory growth, nicotinamide nucleotides
and adenosine phosphates were also measured using LC/MS/MS (Fig. S5A–C). NADH
levels (reduced 64.9%) were significantly lower in the nos mutant (P =0.015 Two-tailed t-
test) whereas NAD+ levels were only 23% lower and not statistically significant (Table 1).
Mol Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 July 01.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

--- PAGE 9 ---

Mogen et al. Page 9
This translated to a higher, but not statistically significant, NAD+ to NADH ratio in the nos
mutant. Corresponding with our observation that oxygen consumption is not significantly
altered in the nos mutant (Fig. 5C), there were no significant differences in the cellular ATP
levels and ADP/ATP ratios between wild-type and nos mutant strains (Table 1 and Fig.
S5C).
Discussion
Previous work on bacterial nitric oxide synthases has primarily focused on phenotypic
changes in response to challenge by external stressors (Patel et al., 2009, Gusarov et al.,
2009, Gusarov & Nudler, 2005, Shatalin et al., 2008). Although the role of NOS on general
bacterial physiology has not been extensively investigated, an OD phenotype similar to that
described herein was also observed in nos mutants of Deinoccoccus radiodurans (Patel et al.,
2009) and Bacillus anthracis (Popova et al., 2015). Establishing S. aureus growth in protein-
rich media without carbohydrates promotes aerobic respiration, and in this condition the S.
aureus nos mutant presented with a decreased OD phenotype. Even though the nos mutant
OD phenotype was unique to exponential phase growth without glucose (Fig. 1A–D), ROS
levels (Fig. 4A and S2A), membrane potential (Fig. 5A and S2B), and CTC staining (Fig.
5B and S2C) were all increased in the nos mutant when grown in both the presence and
absence of glucose. This suggests that the OD phenotype may be independent of increased
ROS levels and/or alterations in aerobic respiratory function associated with the nos mutant.
Although the exact cause of the OD (Fig. 1A) and cell elongation (Fig. 2A–D) phenotypes
of the S. aureus nos mutant is unknown, an elongated cell phenotype was previously
reported in a S. aureus aconitase mutant (Somerville et al., 2002). Given that aconitase
activity was also decreased in the nos mutant when grown aerobically in the absence of
glucose (Fig. 6B), it is possible that its decreased OD and/or elongated cell phenotype(s) are
related to decreased aconitase activity.
Although bacterial NOS has been found to contribute to oxidative stress resistance in S.
aureus (Sapp et al., 2014, van Sorge et al., 2013, Gusarov & Nudler, 2005), the exact
protective mechanism(s) are unknown. In Bacillus, NOS-derived oxidative stress resistance
has been linked to NO mediated activation of catalase and depletion of free cysteine limiting
the Fenton reaction (Gusarov & Nudler, 2005, Shatalin et al., 2008). Although little is
known how NOS promotes oxidative stress resistance in S. aureus (Sapp et al., 2014, van
Sorge et al., 2013, Gusarov & Nudler, 2005), our data suggests that the mechanism is not
like that of Bacillus because catalase activity was not adversely affected in the S. aureus nos
mutant (Fig. 4C). A potential alternative mechanism has been observed in Salmonella,
whereby exogenous NO was found to trigger an adaptive response to oxidative stress by
arresting respiration (Husain et al., 2008). Respiratory inhibition led to accumulation of
NADH, whereby NADH was able to: directly scavenge hydroxyl radicals (OH·) (Goldstein
& Czapski, 2000), promote AhpCF peroxidactic detoxification of peroxynitrite (Bryk et al.,
2000), and fuel detoxification of H O by AhpCF alkylhydroperoxidase (Jonsson et al.,
2 2
2007). In a S. aureus nos mutant, it is possible that altered respiratory dehydrogenase
activity (Fig. 5B) decreases NADH levels (Table 1), and in turn promotes protection. Our
data does show that NADH levels were lower in the nos mutant (Table 1) and ahpF
expression was increased 2.2-fold (Supplemental Table S4), both of which could be for
Mol Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 July 01.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

--- PAGE 10 ---

Mogen et al. Page 10
compensation of altered respiratory chain function (Figs. 5A and 5B) and increased ROS
levels (Fig 4A–B). Furthermore, it is likely that increased overall endogenous ROS in the
nos mutant overwhelms the cellular oxidative defense mechanisms, making the nos mutant
more sensitive to external oxidative stress. Additional evidence that supports the induction of
the oxidative stress response in the nos mutant, is the decrease in expression of purine and
pyrimidine biosynthesis genes (Fig. 3). Altered expression of these biosynthesis genes
appears to be a general stress response in S. aureus, as examination of metadata using the
Staphylococcus aureus transcriptome meta-database (SATMD) (Gopal et al., 2015) revealed
differential expression under multiple stress conditions including acid shock, DNA damage,
antimicrobial challenge, oxidative, and nitrosative stress.
In both mammals (Brown, 1995, Giulivi et al., 2006, Brunori et al., 2004) and bacteria
(Borisov et al., 2004, Borisov et al., 2006, Butler et al., 2002, Junemann & Wrigglesworth,
1996), NO is well established to bind to heme-containing cytochromes, effectively
outcompeting O and inhibiting respiration [reviewed in (Giuffre et al., 2012, Sarti et al.,
2
2003, Brunori et al., 2006)]. Regulation of respiration by NOS has also been observed in
mammals by a proposed mitochondrial NOS (mtNOS) isoform (Lacza et al., 2003, Boveris
et al., 2000), and disruption of this NOS-mediated regulation was found to increase
generation of ROS (Parihar et al., 2008b), similar to what we observed in the S. aureus nos
mutant during aerobic growth (Fig. 4A–B). Furthermore, it has been recently reported that
saNOS is required by S. aureus cells growing in a low-oxygen environment to switch to
nitrate-based respiration (Kinkel et al., 2016), by a proposed mechanism whereby saNOS-
derived NO interacts with terminal respiratory cytochromes to divert electrons to nitrate
reductase. Our UAMS-1 nos mutant demonstrated slightly elevated oxygen consumption
under both aerobic (Fig. 5C) and low-oxygen nitrate growth (data not shown), similar to that
reported for the nos mutant in S. aureus strain COL (Kinkel et al., 2016). However, we
observed increased membrane potential and increased CTC staining in our S. aureus
UAMS-1 nos mutant during exponential aerobic growth (Figs. 5A–5B). The increased CTC
staining was not likely a result of increased NADH in the cell or increased expression of
NADH dehydrogenase, as our targeted metabolomics data showed a decrease in overall
NADH levels in the nos mutant (Table 1) and expression of NADH dehydrogenase
(SAR0903) was decreased 1.76-fold in the nos mutant. Furthermore, unlike the data
presented in (Kinkel et al., 2016), we did not see membrane potential dissipation when our
mutant was grown under low-oxygen nitrate conditions (data not shown). The difference in
low-oxygen membrane potential phenotypes between these two studies is potentially due to
the fact that, unlike strain COL, UAMS-1 (used in our studies) contains an NO reductase
(nor) gene that is highly expressed during low-oxygen growth (Lewis et al., 2015), which
may minimize the effect of endogenously-produced NO on low-oxygen respiration in
UAMS-1. Nevertheless, the data presented herein, combined with the recent study by
(Kinkel et al., 2016), strongly support a role for saNOS in modulating respiration under both
aerobic and low-oxygen growth conditions.
In S. aureus, disruption of preferred metabolic pathways or respiratory function by
nitrosative stress (Richardson et al., 2006, Richardson et al., 2008), H O (Chang et al.,
2 2
2006), or mutation of heme biosynthesis genes (Kohler et al., 2003) induces expression of
genes associated with a lactate based anaerobic metabolism. Interestingly, our nos mutant
Mol Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 July 01.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

--- PAGE 11 ---

Mogen et al. Page 11
showed increased expression of genes related to a lactate based anaerobic metabolism (ldh2,
nar, pflAB, pyk, ackA) when grown under conditions promoting aerobic respiration
(Supplemental Table S1), with a significant decrease in intracellular lactate levels also being
observed (Table 1 and Fig. S3B). In S. aureus, lactate fermentation is catalyzed by lactate
dehydrogenases (ldh1, ldh2, ddh) (Richardson et al., 2008), which ferment pyruvate to
lactate and oxidizing NADH. Indeed, ldh2 expression was increased 8.1-fold and a
significant decrease in NADH levels was observed in the nos mutant relative to wild-type. L-
lactate can also drive respiration by donating electrons to lactate quinone oxidoreductase
(Lqo). It is therefore plausible that the nos mutant could be respiring on lactate to regenerate
reduced cofactors needed for metabolic processes.
A second possible explanation for increased anaerobic gene expression in the nos mutant is
the presence of altered TCA cycle metabolites (Fig. 7) and decreased aconitase activity (Fig.
6B). Examination of the metabolomics data suggests a partial shutdown of the right arm of
the TCA cycle in the nos mutant, which would explain the decreased levels of α-
ketoglutarate and citrate, combined with accumulation of fumarate and malate (Fig. 7).
Upstream anaerobic metabolism may provide an outlet for these overflow metabolites, as
fumarate and malate could be potentially converted to oxaloacetate, phosphoenolpyruvate
(catalyzed by phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (PckA) (Scovill et al., 1996)), and finally
into pyruvate (catalyzed by pyruvate kinase (Pyk) (Zoraghi et al., 2010) (Fig. 7). In support
of this, pyk expression was increased 2.0 -fold in the nos mutant relative to wild-type
(Supplemental Table S1). In addition to preferential use of the left arm of the TCA cycle, a
second source of fumarate accumulation in the nos mutant could be derived from Arg and
Ctl metabolism, as Ctl levels were significantly higher in the nos mutant relative to wild-
type (Table 1). Catalysis of two intermediate reactions (arginosuccinate synthase and
arginosuccinate lyase) (Fig. 7) can convert Ctl to fumarate, which may also account for the
increased fumarate levels observed in the nos mutant. Furthermore, higher Ctl levels may be
driven by increased ornithine carbamoyltransferase (otc; 3.01-fold increased expression)
activity in nos mutant (Supplemental Table S1). This is supported by the fact that L-
glutamate (Glt), L-glutamine (Gln), and L-ornithine (Orn) are all decreased in the nos
mutant (Table 1). When mapped together (Fig. 7), the RNAseq and metabolomics data
support a metabolic scenario in which the nos mutant presents with a partial shutdown of the
right arm of the TCA cycle and therefore increases expression of upstream anaerobic
metabolism genes to balance loss of TCA cycle activity.
In summary, our data suggest that saNOS and/or NOS-derived NO influence as-yet unknown
component(s) of the aerobic respiratory chain. Disruption of this relationship leads to
elevated ROS levels, as well as altered membrane potential and respiratory dehydrogenase
activity. In this model, NO could protect against damaging ROS by several potential
mechanisms, such as: 1) managing appropriate levels of protective NADH, 2) regulating
endogenous ROS detoxification or production by as-yet unidentified mechanisms, and/or 3)
slowing the production of endogenous ROS by contributing to proper respiratory function.
In any of these scenarios, endogenous NO production via saNOS appears to play an
important role in S. aureus physiology in the absence of external stress. Loss of saNOS
results in dramatic gene expression and metabolic adaptations that presumably enable the
nos mutant to continue to grow when normal aerobic respiratory function is altered. These
Mol Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 July 01.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

--- PAGE 12 ---

Mogen et al. Page 12
data suggest that when saNOS is present, the right arm of the TCA cycle is active, producing
NADH and/or reductants to drive respiration. Upon loss of saNOS, multiple anaerobic
metabolism genes present with increased expression, potentially providing S. aureus with a
way to respond to disrupted respiratory metabolism and TCA cycle activity. Our on-going
research seeks to determine exactly how NOS influences the respiratory chain, as well as
determining what transcriptional regulators promote the gene expression and metabolic
changes observed in the nos mutant.
Experimental Procedures
Bacterial strains and culture conditions
S. aureus strain UAMS-1 and its isogenic nos mutant and complement strains (Sapp et al.,
2014) were used for all experiments in this study, unless otherwise indicated. Mutant strains,
plasmids, and primers are listed in supplemental Tables S3–S4. Generation of the nos::erm
mutation in strain LAC-13C was performed as previously described (Sapp et al., 2014). Prior
to each experiment, fresh cultures of S. aureus were streaked from −80°C frozen stocks on
tryptic soy agar (TSA) containing antibiotic (as required, Table S3), and grown for 24 hours.
A single isolated colony was used to inoculate overnight cultures of S. aureus grown in
tryptic soy broth (TSB) containing 14 mM glucose (TSB+G) with antibiotic selection (as
appropriate) at 37 °C and shaking at 250 RPM. Unless otherwise noted, for aerobic growth
conditions, 40 ml (500 ml flask, 1:12.5 volume:flask ratio) of TSB+G or TSB lacking
glucose (TSB-G) was inoculated to an OD = 0.05 and grown at 37 °C and 250 RPM. For
600
all chemical complementation experiments, DPTA NONOate (Cayman) was used as the NO
donor. A 150 mM stock solution of DPTA NONOate was made by dissolving 10 mg in 0.01
M NaOH, and aliquots were stored at −80°C for no more than two weeks. For each
experiment, DPTA NONOate was added to a final concentration of 100 µM in sterile media
just prior to bacterial inoculation.
Growth curve analysis
For each growth curve experiment, TSB-G or TSB+G was inoculated to an OD = 0.05
600
from fresh (approximately 15 hours growth) overnight cultures and grown aerobically for 24
hours at 37 °C and 250 RPM in 500 ml Erlenmeyer flasks (1:12.5 volume:flask ratio).
Samples (1 ml) were withdrawn from each culture every two hours and serial diluted,
followed by track plating (Jett et al., 1997) to determine CFU/ml. OD readings were also
600
acquired at each time point. For NO complementation growth curves, experiments were
performed as described above in TSB-G, except that cultures were grown for only 8 hours in
250 ml Erlenmeyer flasks at a 1:12.5 volume:flask ratio.
Scanning electron microscopy
Aerobic bacterial cultures were grown for 6 hours in TSB-G, followed by harvesting of 10
ml from each culture by centrifugation at room temperature for 3 minutes at 3901 × g. Data
is representative of one biological replicate mounted on two individual stubs for imaging of
12–14 random fields of view. Cell pellets were washed in 10 ml sterile 1× PBS, centrifuged
as described above, and resuspended in 1.2 ml of Trumps fixative (4% formalin and 2%
glutaraldehyde in 0.2 M sodium cacodylate buffer) followed by incubation at room
Mol Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 July 01.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

--- PAGE 13 ---

Mogen et al. Page 13
temperature for 15 minutes. Cells were stored at 4 °C before being processed using a
microwave-assisted methodology (Pelco BioWave Pro, Ted Pella, Redding, CA, USA).
Fixed cells were washed in 1× PBS, pH 7.24, post fixed with 2% buffered osmium tetroxide,
washed with water, dehydrated in a graded ethanol series 25%, 50%, 60%, 75%, 95%, 100%
and subjected to critical point drying (Autosamdri 815, Tousimis, Rocksville, MD USA).
Cells on Millipore filters were then mounted onto aluminum specimen mounts with double
sided adhesive tabs, and sputter coated with Gold/Palladium (DeskV, Denton Vacuum,
Moorestown, NJ USA). Samples were imaged with a field-emission scanning electron
microscope (S-4000, Hitachi High Technologies America, Inc. Schaumburg, IL, USA). Cell
lengths from 12–14 fields of view were measured using the ImageJ software program
(Schneider et al., 2012).
RNAseq analysis
RNAseq analysis was performed on total RNA isolated from 4 hour aerobic TSB-G cultures
of UAMS-1 and the nos::erm mutant as previously-described for S. aureus (Carroll et al.,
2016b, Carroll et al., 2016a). All reagents used were dedicated RNase free and care was
taken to process isolated RNA as quickly as possible. In brief, RNA was extracted using an
RNeasy kit (Qiagen) treated and treated with DNAse to remove in genomic DNA (Ambion
Turbo DNA-free kit). DNAse-treated RNA was immediately analyzed on a Bioanalyzer
(Agilent RNA 6000 nano chip) to determine RNA integrity based on the RNA integrity
number (RIN). To ensure minimal rRNA degradation, an RIN number of 9.9 out of 10 was
confirmed before proceeding. Removal of rRNA was then completed using both the Ribo-
Zero Magnetic Kit (Epicentre) for Gram-positive bacteria, followed by a second round of
purification using the MicrobExpress Bacterial mRNA Enrichment Kit (Life Technologies).
Wild-type or nos mutant RNA isolated from 3 independent experiments were pooled prior to
proceeding with RNAseq analysis. RNAseq was carried out using the IonTorrent PGM
platform, with library construction first being generated by Ion Total RNAseq v2 Kits (Life
Technologies). Template positive Ion Sphere™ Particles (ISPs) were generated using an Ion
PGM™ Template OT2 200 Kit, followed by sequencing on an Ion 318™ Chip v2 using Ion
PGM™ 200 Sequencing Kits. Read alignment and data analysis was completed using the
CLC Genomics Workbench platform (Qiagen) as previously described (Carroll et al.,
2016b). Alignments were completed by mapping all reads to the MRSA252 genome
(NC_002952.2). First, raw data files were imported in .sff format to the software platform,
and any residual reads corresponding to rRNA were filtered out. Expression values for S.
aureus genes were calculated as RPKM values (reads per kilobase material per million
reads), according to the CLC Genomics Workbench protocols. Data sets were normalized by
quantile normalization (1). To identify genes demonstrating meaningful differences in
expression, the following cut off criteria were applied to the data: (1) To reduce the impact
of non-unique reads that can map to multiple locations, the percent unique reads mapping to
genes had to exceed 80%. (2) To eliminate lowly expressed genes we imposed a cut-off
whereby the RPKM expression value of a gene must be greater than or equal to 50 in at least
one data set. (3) A cut-off of 2-fold or higher was applied to identify genes showing
differential expression. Differential expression analysis was conducted using the CLC
Genomics Workbench software platform. All raw RNAseq data has been deposited to the
GEO database. The UAMS-1 4-hour RNAseq data was previously reported in another
Mol Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 July 01.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

--- PAGE 14 ---

Mogen et al. Page 14
publication (Carroll et al., 2016a), and the data is available through GEO accession number
GSE74936 (sample GSM1938000). The nos mutant 4-hour sample is also available through
GEO accession number GSE77400. Gene expression was confirmed by qRT-PCR on RNA
isolated from 3 ml of culture after growth for 4 hours in TSB-G using our previously-
published methods for S. aureus (Lewis & Rice, 2016). For all qRT-PCR reactions, 10 µM
stock solutions of each forward and reverse primer was used. All qRT-PCR reactions were
performed on RNA from 3 individual biological replicates.
Measurement of intracellular ROS and O −
2
Total ROS and O − were measured with the cell-permeable fluorescent stains CM-
2
H DCFDA (Life technologies) and MitoSOX™ Red (Life technologies), respectively. For
2
intracellular ROS detection, 19 ml of culture was removed from aerobic TSB-G cultures
after 3 hours of growth (n=3 independent experiments per strain). Addition of 15 µM
thioridizine HCl was completed at time of inoculation for treated cultures. Cell pellets were
harvested by centrifugation at room temperature and 3901 × g, washed in 1 ml Hanks
Balanced Salt Solution (HBSS), and then resuspended in 1 ml HBSS containing 10 µM final
concentration of CM-H CFDA. CM-H DCFDA was added from a 10 mM stock solution,
2 2
freshly prepared by dissolving the stain in DMSO per the manufacturer’s instructions. Cell
suspensions were incubated at 37 °C for 60 minutes, followed by an additional HBSS wash
step (as above) and resuspension in 1 ml HBSS. Triplicate aliquots (200 µl) of each stained
cell suspension were then transferred to wells of a 96-well optically clear black tissue
culture plate (Costar 3904), and the relative fluorescence units (RFU) and OD of each
600
well was measured (EX: 485±20 nm, EM: 516±20 nm) after plate incubation for 15 minutes
at 37 °C using a Synergy HT plate reader (Biotek). RFU were normalized to the OD of
600
each well. For MitoSOX™ superoxide staining, 10 ml of each culture was isolated after 3
hours aerobic growth in TSB-G, centrifuged at 3901 × g for 5 minutes, and resuspended in
MitoSOX™ reagent (prepared by diluting a freshly-made 5 mM stock solution to 5 µM in
1× PBS, according to manufacturer’s protocols). Cells were then incubated for 10 minutes at
37 °C and washed once with 1× PBS. Triplicate aliquots (200 µl) of each stained cell
suspension were then transferred to wells of a Costar 3904 plate, and the RFU and OD of
600
each well was immediately measured (EX: 500±27 nm, EM: 600±40 nm) using a Synergy
HT plate reader (Biotek). RFU were normalized to the OD of each well.
600
Determination of catalase activity
From 3 hour TSB-G cultures of wild-type, nos mutant, and complement strains, 5 ml was
harvested by centrifugation at 3901 ×g for 5 minutes at 4 °C. The growth medium was
removed, and cell pellets were immediately stored at −80 °C until use. For preparation of
protein lysate, pellets were thawed on ice and resuspended in 1 ml of reaction buffer (0.1 M
Tris-HCl pH 7.0) followed by mechanical disruption with lysing matrix B tubes (0.1 mm
silica spheres, MP Biomedicals) and centrifugation at 13,000 × g at 4 °C to remove cellular
debris. Cytosolic protein concentration was determined using the Pierce™ BCA protein
quantification assay. Soluble catalase activity was measured using the Amplex Red catalase
activity kit (Life Technologies) following manufacturers protocols. In brief, both 1:1000
diluted cytosolic protein samples and purified catalase with known concentrations were
treated with H O , followed by the addition of Amplex Red and horseradish peroxidase to
2 2
Mol Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 July 01.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

--- PAGE 15 ---

Mogen et al. Page 15
final concentrations of 50 µM and 0.2 U/ml, respectively. Fluorescence (EX: 540 ± 25 nm,
EM: 600 ± 40 nm) of each sample (caused by residual H O reaction with Amplex Red) was
2 2
then recorded after 1 hour of fluorescent measurements (RFU) using a Synergy HT
microplate reader (Biotek). A standard curve for H O loss was generated from the purified
2 2
catalase and used to determine activity of the unknown samples by plotting the RFU
measurement of each catalase standard on the y-axis against the amount (units) of each
catalase standard on the x-axis. All samples were normalized against the no catalase control.
The catalase activity of each unknown sample was then extrapolated from the standard
curve, and normalized to the total cytosolic protein.
Assessment of membrane potential
Aerobic cultures were grown in TSB+G or TSB-G for 3 hours, then cells from 1 ml of
culture were harvested by centrifugation and stained with the BacLight™ Bacterial
Membrane Potential Kit (Invitrogen) as previously described for S. aureus (Lewis et al.,
2015, Patton et al., 2006). In brief, cell pellets from 1 ml of each culture were washed once
with 1× PBS and 25 µl of each washed cell suspension was added to 2 ml 1× PBS containing
30 µM 3,3′-diethloxacarbocyanine iodide (DiOC
2
(3)). Carbonyl cyanide 3-
chlorophenylhydrazone (CCCP), a depolarizing agent, was added to one tube of diluted
wild-type cells during staining to a final concentration of 5 µM as a positive control for
membrane depolarization. After staining, cells were analyzed by flow cytometry with the
FACSort flow cytometer (BD Biosciences San Jose CA, USA) using published
specifications (Lewis et al., 2015). For each sample, 50,000 events were monitored for red
and green fluorescence and then a red/green ratio was calculated. In select experiments, 100
µM of DPTA NONOate was included at time of inoculation as described above. Histograms
were generated using the FCS Express 4 Flow Cytometry Software (DeNovo).
CTC staining
Respiration was measured using a 5-Cyano-2,3-ditolyl tetrazolium chloride (CTC) stain as
previously described for S. aureus (Lewis et al., 2015). In brief, 2 ml of each culture was
pelleted by centrifugation, washed with 1 ml of 1× PBS and pelleted, and then resuspended
in 650 µl of PBS containing 4.5 mM CTC. Triplicate aliquots (200 µl) of each stained cell
suspension were transferred to a Costar 3904 plate. The RFU and OD of each well was
600
measured (EX: 485±20 nm, EM: 645±40 nm) at 10 minute intervals for 120 minutes at
37 °C using a Synergy HT plate reader (Biotek). RFU readings collected at 70 minutes were
normalized to the first (t=0) OD reading of each well. Data is listed as fold-change
600
relative to wild-type due to variability in absolute numbers from day to day experiments. To
prevent clumping the plate was shaken for 5 seconds before each read.
Oxygen consumption
Oxygen consumption measurements were completed using a 4-channel free radical analyzer
(TBR-4100, World Precision Instruments) and Clark type electrode (ISO-Oxy-2, World
Precision instruments). Oxygen measurements were conducted on TSB-G cultures
inoculated and grown aerobically as described above. After 3 hours of growth, 25 ml
samples were pelleted by centrifugation (3901 ×g for 5 minutes at room temperature) and
cell pellets resuspended in 1 ml of aerated 1× PBS prewarmed to 37 °C. Oxygen
Mol Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 July 01.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

--- PAGE 16 ---

Mogen et al. Page 16
consumption measurements were determined using methods described previously at 37 °C
(Kinkel et al., 2016). Data was only used in the linear portion of the consumption curves
(approximately 2 minutes) and relative rate (%) of O consumption to wild-type was
2
determined by measuring the slope of the consumption curve and normalizing to cell counts.
To assure proper function of the electrode, calibration curves were completed each day
before experimentation.
Determination of aconitase activity
Whole cytosolic protein was isolated from 18 ml of aerobic TSB-G cultures grown for 3
hours. Addition of 15 µM thioridizine HCl was completed at time of inoculation for treated
cultures. Cells were isolated by centrifugation at 3901 ×g for 10 minutes at 4 °C followed by
washing with 1 ml of cold 1× PBS. Cell lysis was completed in 1× aconitase assay buffer
(50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4) containing 100 µg/ml lysostaphin (Sigma) and 27.3 Kunitz units
DNase I (Qiagen). After 30 minutes of incubation at 37°C, cell debris was removed by
centrifugation at 13,000 × g (4°C) and proteins were immediately frozen at −80°C for future
analysis. Aconitase activity was quantified using the Cayman Chemicals Aconitase Assay
Kit, following the manufacturer’s recommended protocols. Assays were performed on 1:4
dilutions of each protein sample, and optical density measurements at 340 nm were taken at
1 minute intervals for an hour with incubation at 37°C. No substrate controls were included
to measure any background noise. Enzyme activity was determined by measuring the
reaction rate (ΔA /min.) and using the NADPH extinction coefficient (0.00313 µM−1,
340
adjusted for the 0.503 cm path length of the well). All sample activity was normalized to
total cytosolic protein as determined by the Pierce™ BCA protein quantification assay (Life
Technologies).
Cell collection and metabolite sample preparation for metabolite analysis
To isolate cell pellets and extracellular media (EXM) for targeted metabolite analysis, 40 ml
of each t=4 hour TSB-G culture was harvested by centrifugation for 10 minutes at 3901 ×g
and 4 °C. After centrifugation, 2 × 1 ml aliquots of each supernatant (EXM) were removed
and immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at −80°C. Cell pellets were quickly
resuspended in 2 ml 1× PBS, centrifuged at 3901 ×g and 4 °C for 3 minutes, and
immediately resuspended in fresh 2 ml PBS. Aliquots (at 1 ml) were separated into two
microcentrifuge tubes and centrifuged at 13,000 × g and 4 °C for 3 minutes. The supernatant
was discarded and pellets were immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at −80°C.
One tube was subsequently processed for metabolite analysis (see below) and the other tube
was used to determine the protein concentration using the Pierce™ BCA protein
quantification assay. All samples were kept on ice for the duration of the sampling procedure
prior to flash freezing in liquid nitrogen and storage at −80 °C. Cell pellets and EXM were
lyophilized to dryness overnight. Lyophilized cell pellets were homogenized in 400 µl of
50/50 acetonitrile/0.3% formic acid using a Precellys (bead-beating) system maintained at
4 °C. The lyophilized EXM samples were reconstituted in 400 µl of 50/50 acetonitrile/0.3%
formic acid and vortexed thoroughly. For the pyridine nucleotide and adenosine phosphate
samples, homogenization with the Precellys system was completed in the presence of 18O -
2
labeled NADH as an internal standard. For NADH and NADPH sample preparation only, a
Mol Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 July 01.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

--- PAGE 17 ---

Mogen et al. Page 17
100 µl aliquot of homogenate was immediately treated with 50/50 methanol/0.2 M NaOH.
The resulting samples were aliquoted and stored at −80 °C.
Extraction, derivatization, and LC/MS/MS quantitation of organic acids from cell
homogenate and extracellular media
A 50 µl aliquot of either cell homogenate or EXM was spiked with a 10 µl mixture of heavy
isotope-labeled organic acid internal standards (lactate, pyruvate, 3-hydroxybutyrate,
succinate, fumarate, malate, α-ketoglutarate, and citrate; Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO;
Cambridge Isotopes, Cambridge, MA; CDN Isotopes, Quebec, Canada). This was followed
by the addition of 50 µl of 0.4 M O-benzylhydroxylamine and 10 µl of 2 M 1-ethyl-3-(3-
dimethylaminopropyl) carbodiimide. Samples were vortexed thoroughly and derivatized at
room temperature for 10 min. The derivatized organic acids were then extracted from the
homogenate by liquid-liquid extraction using 100 µl of water and 600 µl of ethyl acetate.
Samples were vortexed for 5 seconds and then centrifuged at 18,000 × g for 5 min at 10 °C.
A 100 µl aliquot of the ethyl acetate layer was dried under nitrogen and reconstituted in 1 ml
of 50/50 methanol/water prior to LC/MS/MS analysis. Derivatized organic acids were
separated on a 2.1 × 100 mm, 1.7 µm Waters Acquity UPLC BEH C18 column (T = 45 °C)
using a 7.5-min linear gradient with 0.1% formic acid in water and 0.1% formic acid in
acetonitrile at a flow rate of 0.3 ml/min. Quantitation of derivatized organic acids was
achieved using multiple reaction monitoring on a Dionex UltiMate 3000 HPLC/Thermo
Scientific Quantiva triple quadrupole mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA).
A standard calibration curve (1–5000 µM for lactate; 0.2–1000 µM for 3-hydroxybutyrate;
0.05–250 µM for pyruvate, succinate, fumarate, malate, and citrate; 0.02–100 µM for α-
ketoglutarate) for derivatized organic acids was prepared by spiking 10 µl aliquots of organic
acids (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) and internal standards (Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO;
Cambridge Isotopes, Cambridge, MA; CDN Isotopes, Quebec, Canada) into 50 µl aliquots
of a 50/50 acetonitrile/0.3% formic acid solution. Calibration samples were derivatized and
extracted similarly to organic acids in cell homogenate and EXM (above). Data for cell
samples were normalized to protein whereas EXM concentrations were given in µM.
Extraction, derivatization, and LC/MS/MS quantitation of amino acids from cell
homogenate and extracellular media
A 100 µl aliquot of either cell homogenate or reconstituted EXM was spiked with a 10 µl
mixture of heavy isotope-labeled amino acid internal standards (Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis,
MO; Cambridge Isotopes, Cambridge, MA; CDN Isotopes, Quebec, Canada). This was
followed by the addition of 800 µl of ice-cold methanol. Samples were vortexed thoroughly
and then centrifuged at 18,000 × g for 5 min at 10 °C. A 100 µl aliquot of the methanol
extract was dried under nitrogen and reconstituted in 80 µl of borate buffer and 20 µl of
MassTrak AAA Reagent (both provided in MassTrak AAA Derivatization Kit; Waters Corp.,
Milford, MA). The samples were then derivatized at 55 °C for 10 minutes prior to
LC/MS/MS analysis. Derivatized amino acids were separated on a 2.1 × 100 mm, 1.7 µm
Waters AccQ·Tag column (T = 55 °C) using a 9.55 min linear gradient with eluents
proprietary to Waters Corp. at a flow rate of 0.7 ml/min. Quantitation of derivatized amino
acids was achieved using multiple reaction monitoring on an Agilent 1290/6490 HPLC/triple
quadrupole mass spectrometer (Waters Corp., Milford, MA). A standard calibration curve
Mol Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 July 01.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

--- PAGE 18 ---

Mogen et al. Page 18
(1–1000 µM for Gly, Ala, Pro, Val, Arg, Thr, Lys and Gln; 0.5–500 µM for Ser, Leu, Ile,
Met, His, Phe, Tyr, Asn, Asp, Gly, Orn and Cit; 0.25–250 µM for Trp) for derivatized amino
acids was prepared by spiking 10 µl aliquots of amino acids (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO)
and internal standards (Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO; Cambridge Isotopes, Cambridge, MA;
CDN Isotopes, Quebec, Canada) into 100 µl aliquots of a 50/50 acetonitrile/0.3% formic
acid solution. Calibration samples were derivatized and extracted similarly to organic acids
in cell homogenate and EXM (above). Data for cell samples were normalized to protein
whereas EXM concentrations were given in µM.
Extraction, derivatization, and LC/MS/MS quantitation of pyridine nucleotides and
adenosine phosphates from cell homogenate
For the extraction of NMN, NAD+, NADP+, and all adenosine phosphates, a 100 µl aliquot
of cell homogenate was spiked with a 10 µl mixture of heavy isotope-labeled internal
standards (18O -labeled NMN and NAD+, synthesized by the Sanford-Burnham Medicinal
2
Chemistry Core; AMP and ADP, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO). This was followed by the
addition of 100 µl of 1 M ammonium formate to adjust the homogenate pH to ~4. Samples
were vortexed thoroughly and centrifuged at 18,000 × g for 5 min at 10 °C. The clarified
homogenates were passed through an AcroPrep Advance 3K Omega Filter Plate (Pall
Corporation, Port Washington, NY) prior to LC/MS/MS analysis. For NADH and NADPH
extraction, the 200 µl aliquot of cell homogenate prepared above was vortexed thoroughly
and centrifuged at 18,000 ×g for 5 min at 10 °C. The clarified homogenates were passed
through an AcroPrep Advance 3K Omega Filter Plate (Pall Corporation, Port Washington,
NY) prior to LC/MS/MS analysis. Select pyridine nucleotides (NMN, NAD+, and NADP+)
and all adenosine phosphates were separated on a 2.1 × 50 mm, 3 µm Thermo Hypercarb
column (T = 30 °C) using a 2.1-min linear gradient with 10 mM ammonium acetate, pH 9.5
and acetonitrile at a flow rate of 0.65 ml/min. Quantitation of these analytes was achieved
using multiple reaction monitoring on a Dionex UltiMate 3000 HPLC/Thermo Scientific
Quantive triple quadrupole mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA). For
adenosine phosphates and NMN, NAD+, and NADP+ determination, a standard calibration
curve (0.625–500 µM for adenosine phosphates, 0.25–200 µM for NAD+, 0.025–20 µM for
NADP+, 0.0025–2 µM for NMN) was prepared by spiking 10 µl aliquots of pyridine
nucleotides (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) and internal standards (synthesized by the
Sanford Burnham Prebys Medicinal Chemistry Core) into 100 µl aliquots of 0.5 M
perchloric acid. Calibration samples were extracted similarly to adenosine phosphates and
pyridine nucleotides in cell homogenate. Data for cell samples were normalized to protein.
NADH and NADPH were separated on a 2.1 × 50 mm, 1.8 µm HSS T3 column (Waters
Corp., Milford, MA) at 40 °C using a 2.2-min linear gradient with 5 mM ammonium acetate,
pH 6 and acetonitrile at a flow rate of 0.54 ml/min. Quantitation of pyridine nucleotides and
adenosine phosphates was achieved using multiple reaction monitoring on a Dionex
UltiMate 3000 HPLC/Thermo Scientific Quantiva triple quadrupole mass spectrometer
(Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA).
Mol Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 July 01.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

--- PAGE 19 ---

Mogen et al. Page 19
Statistical analysis
Statistical analysis was completed with Sigmaplot software version 13, build 13.0.0.83
(Systat). Data were tested for normality and equal variance prior to choosing the appropriate
parametric or non-parametric test, respectively.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
The authors gratefully acknowledge Karen Kelley and Kim Kelley (UF-ICBR Electron Microscopy Core) for
assistance with SEM and TEM sample preparation and imaging, and Neal Benson (UF-ICBR Flow Cytometry
Core) for assistance with flow cytometry assays. This work was supported in part by an IFAS Early Career Award
(KCR), Southeast Center for Integrated Metabolomics (SECIM) Pilot and Feasibility Award to KCR (funded by
SECIM NIH grant U24-DK097209), NIH grant AI118999 to KCR, NSF grant DUE-1161177 to Dr. Eric W. Triplett
(Dept. Microbiology and Cell Science, University of Florida), U.S. Dept. of Education grant PO31C110011 to
Miami-Dade College, and NIH grant AI080626 to LNS.
References
Adak S, Aulak KS, Stuehr DJ. Direct evidence for nitric oxide production by a nitric-oxide synthase-
like protein from Bacillus subtilis. The Journal of biological chemistry. 2002a; 277:16167–16171.
[PubMed: 11856757]
Adak S, Bilwes AM, Panda K, Hosfield D, Aulak KS, McDonald JF, Tainer JA, Getzoff ED, Crane
BR, Stuehr DJ. Cloning, expression, and characterization of a nitric oxide synthase protein from
Deinococcus radiodurans. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America. 2002b; 99:107–112. [PubMed: 11756668]
Alderton WK, Cooper CE, Knowles RG. Nitric oxide synthases: structure, function and inhibition. The
Biochemical journal. 2001; 357:593–615. [PubMed: 11463332]
Aribi M, Meziane W, Habi S, Boulatika Y, Marchandin H, Aymeric JL. Macrophage Bactericidal
Activities against Staphylococcus aureus Are Enhanced In Vivo by Selenium Supplementation in a
Dose-Dependent Manner. PloS one. 2015; 10:e0135515. [PubMed: 26340099]
Arora DP, Hossain S, Xu Y, Boon EM. Nitric Oxide Regulation of Bacterial Biofilms. Biochemistry.
2015; 54:3717–3728. [PubMed: 25996573]
Borisov VB, Forte E, Konstantinov AA, Poole RK, Sarti P, Giuffre A. Interaction of the bacterial
terminal oxidase cytochrome bd with nitric oxide. FEBS letters. 2004; 576:201–204. [PubMed:
15474037]
Borisov VB, Forte E, Sarti P, Brunori M, Konstantinov AA, Giuffre A. Nitric oxide reacts with the
ferryl-oxo catalytic intermediate of the CuB-lacking cytochrome bd terminal oxidase. FEBS letters.
2006; 580:4823–4826. [PubMed: 16904110]
Boveris A, Costa LE, Poderoso JJ, Carreras MC, Cadenas E. Regulation of mitochondrial respiration
by oxygen and nitric oxide. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences. 2000; 899:121–135.
[PubMed: 10863534]
Brown GC. Nitric oxide regulates mitochondrial respiration and cell functions by inhibiting
cytochrome oxidase. FEBS letters. 1995; 369:136–139. [PubMed: 7649245]
Brunori M, Forte E, Arese M, Mastronicola D, Giuffre A, Sarti P. Nitric oxide and the respiratory
enzyme. Biochimica et biophysica acta. 2006; 1757:1144–1154. [PubMed: 16792997]
Brunori M, Giuffre A, Forte E, Mastronicola D, Barone MC, Sarti P. Control of cytochrome c oxidase
activity by nitric oxide. Biochimica et biophysica acta. 2004; 1655:365–371. [PubMed: 15100052]
Bryk R, Griffin P, Nathan C. Peroxynitrite reductase activity of bacterial peroxiredoxins. Nature. 2000;
407:211–215. [PubMed: 11001062]
Mol Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 July 01.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

--- PAGE 20 ---

Mogen et al. Page 20
Butler C, Forte E, Maria Scandurra F, Arese M, Giuffre A, Greenwood C, Sarti P. Cytochrome bo(3)
from Escherichia coli: the binding and turnover of nitric oxide. Biochemical and biophysical
research communications. 2002; 296:1272–1278. [PubMed: 12207912]
Carroll RK, Weiss A, Broach WH, Wiemels RE, Mogen AB, Rice KC, Shaw LN. Genome-wide
Annotation, Identification, and Global Transcriptomic Analysis of Regulatory or Small RNA Gene
Expression in Staphylococcus aureus. mBio. 2016a; 9:e01990–15.
Carroll RK, Weiss A, Shaw LN. RNA-Sequencing of Staphylococcus aureus Messenger RNA.
Methods in molecular biology (Clifton, N.J.). 2016b; 1373:131–141.
Caspi R, Altman T, Billington R, Dreher K, Foerster H, Fulcher CA, Holland TA, Keseler IM, Kothari
A, Kubo A, Krummenacker M, Latendresse M, Mueller LA, Ong Q, Paley S, Subhraveti P, Weaver
DS, Weerasinghe D, Zhang P, Karp PD. The MetaCyc database of metabolic pathways and
enzymes and the BioCyc collection of Pathway/Genome Databases. Nucleic acids research. 2014;
42:D459–471. [PubMed: 24225315]
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Outbreaks of community-associated methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus skin infections--Los Angeles County, California, 2002–2003. MMWR.
Morbidity and mortality weekly report. 2003; 52:88.
Chang W, Small DA, Toghrol F, Bentley WE. Global transcriptome analysis of Staphylococcus aureus
response to hydrogen peroxide. J Bacteriol. 2006; 188:1648–1659. [PubMed: 16452450]
Chatterjee I, Schmitt S, Batzilla CF, Engelmann S, Keller A, Ring MW, Kautenburger R, Ziebuhr W,
Hecker M, Preissner KT, Bischoff M, Proctor RA, Beck HP, Lenhof HP, Somerville GA,
Herrmann M. Staphylococcus aureus ClpC ATPase is a late growth phase effector of metabolism
and persistence. Proteomics. 2009; 9:1152–1176. [PubMed: 19253280]
Collins FM, Lascelles J. The effect of growth conditions on oxidative and dehydrogenase activity in
Staphylococcus aureus. Journal of general microbiology. 1962; 29:531–535. [PubMed: 14022366]
Crack JC, Smith LJ, Stapleton MR, Peck J, Watmough NJ, Buttner MJ, Buxton RS, Green J,
Oganesyan VS, Thomson AJ, Le Brun NE. Mechanistic insight into the nitrosylation of the
[4Fe-4S] cluster of WhiB-like proteins. Journal of the American Chemical Society. 2011;
133:1112–1121. [PubMed: 21182249]
Crane BR, Sudhamsu J, Patel BA. Bacterial nitric oxide synthases. Annual review of biochemistry.
2010; 79:445–470.
Crawford NM. Mechanisms for nitric oxide synthesis in plants. Journal of experimental botany. 2006;
57:471–478. [PubMed: 16356941]
Czapski G, Goldstein S. The role of the reactions of .NO with superoxide and oxygen in biological
systems: a kinetic approach. Free radical biology & medicine. 1995; 19:785–794. [PubMed:
8582651]
Deurenberg RH, Stobberingh EE. The evolution of Staphylococcus aureus. Infection, genetics and
evolution : journal of molecular epidemiology and evolutionary genetics in infectious diseases.
2008; 8:747–763. [PubMed: 18718557]
Fey PD, Endres JL, Yajjala VK, Widhelm TJ, Boissy RJ, Bose JL, Bayles KW. A genetic resource for
rapid and comprehensive phenotype screening of nonessential Staphylococcus aureus genes.
mBio. 2013; 4:e00537–00512. [PubMed: 23404398]
Forstermann U, Sessa WC. Nitric oxide synthases: regulation and function. European heart journal.
2012; 33:829–837. 837a-837d. [PubMed: 21890489]
Fuller JR, Vitko NP, Perkowski EF, Scott E, Khatri D, Spontak JS, Thurlow LR, Richardson AR.
Identification of a lactate-quinone oxidoreductase in Staphylococcus aureus that is essential for
virulence. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2011; 1:19. [PubMed: 22919585]
Gardner PR. Aconitase: sensitive target and measure of superoxide. Methods in enzymology. 2002;
349:9–23. [PubMed: 11912933]
Gardner PR, Fridovich I. Superoxide sensitivity of the Escherichia coli aconitase. The Journal of
biological chemistry. 1991; 266:19328–19333. [PubMed: 1655783]
Gardner PR, Gardner AM, Martin LA, Salzman AL. Nitric oxide dioxygenase: an enzymic function
for flavohemoglobin. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America. 1998; 95:10378–10383. [PubMed: 9724711]
Mol Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 July 01.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

--- PAGE 21 ---

Mogen et al. Page 21
Giuffre A, Borisov VB, Mastronicola D, Sarti P, Forte E. Cytochrome bd oxidase and nitric oxide:
from reaction mechanisms to bacterial physiology. FEBS letters. 2012; 586:622–629. [PubMed:
21821033]
Giulivi C, Kato K, Cooper CE. Nitric oxide regulation of mitochondrial oxygen consumption I:
cellular physiology. American journal of physiology. Cell physiology. 2006; 291:C1225–1231.
[PubMed: 16885394]
Goldstein S, Czapski G. Reactivity of peroxynitrite versus simultaneous generation of (*)NO and O(2)
(*)(−) toward NADH. Chemical research in toxicology. 2000; 13:736–741. [PubMed: 10956061]
Gopal T, Nagarajan V, Elasri MO. SATRAT: Staphylococcus aureus transcript regulatory network
analysis tool. PeerJ. 2015; 3:e717. [PubMed: 25653902]
Griffith OW, Stuehr DJ. Nitric oxide synthases: properties and catalytic mechanism. Annual review of
physiology. 1995; 57:707–736.
Gusarov I, Nudler E. NO-mediated cytoprotection: instant adaptation to oxidative stress in bacteria.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 2005;
102:13855–13860. [PubMed: 16172391]
Gusarov I, Nudler E. S-nitrosylation signaling in Escherichia coli. Science signaling. 2012; 5:pe26.
[PubMed: 22692422]
Gusarov I, Shatalin K, Starodubtseva M, Nudler E. Endogenous nitric oxide protects bacteria against a
wide spectrum of antibiotics. Science (New York, N.Y.). 2009; 325:1380–1384.
Gusarov I, Starodubtseva M, Wang ZQ, McQuade L, Lippard SJ, Stuehr DJ, Nudler E. Bacterial nitric-
oxide synthases operate without a dedicated redox partner. The Journal of biological chemistry.
2008; 283:13140–13147. [PubMed: 18316370]
Holden JK, Kang S, Beasley FC, Cinelli MA, Li H, Roy SG, Dejam D, Edinger AL, Nizet V,
Silverman RB, Poulos TL. Nitric Oxide Synthase as a Target for Methicillin-Resistant
Staphylococcus aureus. Chemistry & biology. 2015a; 22:785–792. [PubMed: 26091171]
Holden JK, Kang S, Hollingsworth SA, Li H, Lim N, Chen S, Huang H, Xue F, Tang W, Silverman
RB, Poulos TL. Structure-Based Design of Bacterial Nitric Oxide Synthase Inhibitors. Journal of
medicinal chemistry. 2015b
Holden JK, Li H, Jing Q, Kang S, Richo J, Silverman RB, Poulos TL. Structural and biological studies
on bacterial nitric oxide synthase inhibitors. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of
the United States of America. 2013; 110:18127–18131. [PubMed: 24145412]
Husain M, Bourret TJ, McCollister BD, Jones-Carson J, Laughlin J, Vazquez-Torres A. Nitric oxide
evokes an adaptive response to oxidative stress by arresting respiration. The Journal of biological
chemistry. 2008; 283:7682–7689. [PubMed: 18198179]
Jakubowski W, Bartosz G. 2,7-dichlorofluorescin oxidation and reactive oxygen species: what does it
measure? Cell biology international. 2000; 24:757–760. [PubMed: 11023655]
Jett BD, Hatter KL, Huycke MM, Gilmore MS. Simplified agar plate method for quantifying viable
bacteria. BioTechniques. 1997; 23:648–650. [PubMed: 9343684]
Jonsson TJ, Ellis HR, Poole LB. Cysteine reactivity and thiol-disulfide interchange pathways in AhpF
and AhpC of the bacterial alkyl hydroperoxide reductase system. Biochemistry. 2007; 46:5709–
5721. [PubMed: 17441733]
Junemann S, Wrigglesworth JM. Binding of NO to the oxygen reaction site of cytochrome bd from
Azotobacter vinelandii. Biochemical Society transactions. 1996; 24:38s. [PubMed: 8674706]
Keshive M, Singh S, Wishnok JS, Tannenbaum SR, Deen WM. Kinetics of S-nitrosation of thiols in
nitric oxide solutions. Chemical research in toxicology. 1996; 9:988–993. [PubMed: 8870986]
Kim NJ, Ahn KB, Jeon JH, Yun CH, Finlay BB, Han SH. Lipoprotein in the cell wall of
Staphylococcus aureus is a major inducer of nitric oxide production in murine macrophages.
Molecular immunology. 2015; 65:17–24. [PubMed: 25600878]
Kinkel TL, Ramos-Montanez S, Pando JM, Tadeo DV, Strom EN, Libby SJ, Fang FC. An essential
role for bacterial nitric oxide synthase in Staphylococcus aureus electron transfer and colonization.
Nat Microbiol. 2016; 2:16224. [PubMed: 27892921]
Kohler C, von Eiff C, Peters G, Proctor RA, Hecker M, Engelmann S. Physiological characterization
of a heme-deficient mutant of Staphylococcus aureus by a proteomic approach. Journal of
bacteriology. 2003; 185:6928–6937. [PubMed: 14617657]
Mol Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 July 01.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

--- PAGE 22 ---

Mogen et al. Page 22
Lacza Z, Snipes JA, Zhang J, Horvath EM, Figueroa JP, Szabo C, Busija DW. Mitochondrial nitric
oxide synthase is not eNOS, nNOS or iNOS. Free radical biology & medicine. 2003; 35:1217–
1228. [PubMed: 14607521]
Lam MA, Pattison DI, Bottle SE, Keddie DJ, Davies MJ. Nitric oxide and nitroxides can act as
efficient scavengers of protein-derived free radicals. Chemical research in toxicology. 2008;
21:2111–2119. [PubMed: 18834151]
Larsen FJ, Schiffer TA, Weitzberg E, Lundberg JO. Regulation of mitochondrial function and
energetics by reactive nitrogen oxides. Free radical biology & medicine. 2012; 53:1919–1928.
[PubMed: 22989554]
LeBel CP, Ischiropoulos H, Bondy SC. Evaluation of the probe 2’,7’-dichlorofluorescin as an indicator
of reactive oxygen species formation and oxidative stress. Chemical research in toxicology. 1992;
5:227–231. [PubMed: 1322737]
Lewis AM, Matzdorf SS, Endres JL, Windham IH, Bayles KW, Rice KC. Examination of the
Staphylococcus aureus nitric oxide reductase (saNOR) reveals its contribution to modulating
intracellular NO levels and cellular respiration. Molecular microbiology. 2015; 96:651–669.
[PubMed: 25651868]
Lewis AM, Rice KC. Quantitative Real-Time PCR (qPCR) Workflow for Analyzing Staphylococcus
aureus Gene Expression. Methods in molecular biology (Clifton, N.J.). 2016; 1373:143–154.
Liebeke M, Lalk M. Staphylococcus aureus metabolic response to changing environmental conditions -
A metabolomics perspective. International journal of medical microbiology : IJMM. 2014;
304:222–229. [PubMed: 24439195]
Lipton, SA. Nature. England: 2001. Physiology. Nitric oxide and respiration; p. 118-119.p. 121
McCollister BD, Hoffman M, Husain M, Vazquez-Torres A. Nitric oxide protects bacteria from
aminoglycosides by blocking the energy-dependent phases of drug uptake. Antimicrobial agents
and chemotherapy. 2011; 55:2189–2196. [PubMed: 21343448]
Messner KR, Imlay JA. The identification of primary sites of superoxide and hydrogen peroxide
formation in the aerobic respiratory chain and sulfite reductase complex of Escherichia coli. The
Journal of biological chemistry. 1999; 274:10119–10128. [PubMed: 10187794]
Messner KR, Imlay JA. Mechanism of superoxide and hydrogen peroxide formation by fumarate
reductase, succinate dehydrogenase, and aspartate oxidase. J Biol Chem. 2002; 277:42563–42571.
[PubMed: 12200425]
Minghetti KC, Gennis RB. The two terminal oxidases of the aerobic respiratory chain of Escherichia
coli each yield water and not peroxide as a final product. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1988;
155:243–248. [PubMed: 2843179]
Mohanty JG, Jaffe JS, Schulman ES, Raible DG. A highly sensitive fluorescent micro-assay of H2O2
release from activated human leukocytes using a dihydroxyphenoxazine derivative. Journal of
immunological methods. 1997; 202:133–141. [PubMed: 9107302]
Moller MN, Li Q, Lancaster JR Jr, Denicola A. Acceleration of nitric oxide autoxidation and
nitrosation by membranes. IUBMB life. 2007; 59:243–248. [PubMed: 17505960]
Nizet V. Understanding how leading bacterial pathogens subvert innate immunity to reveal novel
therapeutic targets. The Journal of allergy and clinical immunology. 2007; 120:13–22. [PubMed:
17606031]
Novo D, Perlmutter NG, Hunt RH, Shapiro HM. Accurate flow cytometric membrane potential
measurement in bacteria using diethyloxacarbocyanine and a ratiometric technique. Cytometry.
1999; 35:55–63. [PubMed: 10554181]
O’Donnell VB, Chumley PH, Hogg N, Bloodsworth A, Darley-Usmar VM, Freeman BA. Nitric oxide
inhibition of lipid peroxidation: kinetics of reaction with lipid peroxyl radicals and comparison
with alpha-tocopherol. Biochemistry. 1997; 36:15216–15223. [PubMed: 9398249]
Olson JS, Foley EW, Rogge C, Tsai AL, Doyle MP, Lemon DD. No scavenging and the hypertensive
effect of hemoglobin-based blood substitutes. Free radical biology & medicine. 2004; 36:685–697.
[PubMed: 14990349]
Otto M. Basis of virulence in community-associated methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus.
Annual review of microbiology. 2010; 64:143–162.
Mol Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 July 01.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

--- PAGE 23 ---

Mogen et al. Page 23
Parihar MS, Nazarewicz RR, Kincaid E, Bringold U, Ghafourifar P. Association of mitochondrial nitric
oxide synthase activity with respiratory chain complex I. Biochemical and biophysical research
communications. 2008a; 366:23–28. [PubMed: 18036554]
Parihar MS, Parihar A, Villamena FA, Vaccaro PS, Ghafourifar P. Inactivation of mitochondrial
respiratory chain complex I leads mitochondrial nitric oxide synthase to become pro-oxidative.
Biochemical and biophysical research communications. 2008b; 367:761–767. [PubMed:
18191636]
Patel BA, Moreau M, Widom J, Chen H, Yin L, Hua Y, Crane BR. Endogenous nitric oxide regulates
the recovery of the radiation-resistant bacterium Deinococcus radiodurans from exposure to UV
light. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 2009;
106:18183–18188. [PubMed: 19841256]
Patton TG, Yang SJ, Bayles KW. The role of proton motive force in expression of the Staphylococcus
aureus cid and lrg operons. Molecular microbiology. 2006; 59:1395–1404. [PubMed: 16468984]
Plata K, Rosato AE, Wegrzyn G. Staphylococcus aureus as an infectious agent: overview of
biochemistry and molecular genetics of its pathogenicity. Acta biochimica Polonica. 2009;
56:597–612. [PubMed: 20011685]
Poole RK. Nitric oxide and nitrosative stress tolerance in bacteria. Biochemical Society transactions.
2005; 33:176–180. [PubMed: 15667299]
Popova TG, Teunis A, Vaseghi H, Zhou W, Espina V, Liotta LA, Popov SG. Nitric oxide as a regulator
of B. anthracis pathogenicity. Frontiers in microbiology. 2015; 6:921. [PubMed: 26388860]
Radi R. Nitric oxide, oxidants, and protein tyrosine nitration. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America. 2004; 101:4003–4008. [PubMed: 15020765]
Radi R. Protein tyrosine nitration: biochemical mechanisms and structural basis of functional effects.
Accounts of chemical research. 2013; 46:550–559. [PubMed: 23157446]
Ramirez-Mata A, Fernandez-Dominguez IJ, Nunez-Reza KJ, Xiqui-Vazquez ML, Baca BE. [Networks
involving quorum sensing, cyclic-di-GMP and nitric oxide on biofilm production in bacteria].
Revista Argentina de microbiologia. 2014; 46:242–255. [PubMed: 25444134]
Richardson AR, Dunman PM, Fang FC. The nitrosative stress response of Staphylococcus aureus is
required for resistance to innate immunity. Molecular microbiology. 2006; 61:927–939. [PubMed:
16859493]
Richardson AR, Libby SJ, Fang FC. A nitric oxide-inducible lactate dehydrogenase enables
Staphylococcus aureus to resist innate immunity. Science (New York, N.Y.). 2008; 319:1672–
1676.
Robinson KM, Janes MS, Pehar M, Monette JS, Ross MF, Hagen TM, Murphy MP, Beckman JS.
Selective fluorescent imaging of superoxide in vivo using ethidium-based probes. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 2006; 103:15038–15043.
[PubMed: 17015830]
Rose IA, O’Connell EL. Mechanism of aconitase action. I. The hydrogen transfer reaction. The
Journal of biological chemistry. 1967; 242:1870–1879. [PubMed: 6024777]
Rubbo H, Radi R, Anselmi D, Kirk M, Barnes S, Butler J, Eiserich JP, Freeman BA. Nitric oxide
reaction with lipid peroxyl radicals spares alpha-tocopherol during lipid peroxidation. Greater
oxidant protection from the pair nitric oxide/alpha-tocopherol than alpha-tocopherol/ascorbate.
The Journal of biological chemistry. 2000; 275:10812–10818. [PubMed: 10753874]
Sapp AM, Mogen AB, Almand EA, Rivera FE, Shaw LN, Richardson AR, Rice KC. Contribution of
the nos-pdt operon to virulence phenotypes in methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus. PloS
one. 2014; 9:e108868. [PubMed: 25275514]
Sarti P, Giuffre A, Barone MC, Forte E, Mastronicola D, Brunori M. Nitric oxide and cytochrome
oxidase: reaction mechanisms from the enzyme to the cell. Free radical biology & medicine. 2003;
34:509–520. [PubMed: 12614840]
Schneider CA, Rasband WS, Eliceiri KW. NIH Image to ImageJ: 25 years of image analysis. Nature
methods. 2012; 9:671–675. [PubMed: 22930834]
Schurig-Briccio LA, Yano T, Rubin H, Gennis RB. Characterization of the type 2 NADH:menaquinone
oxidoreductases from Staphylococcus aureus and the bactericidal action of phenothiazines.
Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014; 1837:954–963. [PubMed: 24709059]
Mol Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 July 01.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

--- PAGE 24 ---

Mogen et al. Page 24
Scovill WH, Schreier HJ, Bayles KW. Identification and characterization of the pckA gene from
Staphylococcus aureus. Journal of bacteriology. 1996; 178:3362–3364. [PubMed: 8655523]
Shapiro HM, Nebe-von-Caron G. Multiparameter flow cytometry of bacteria. Methods in molecular
biology (Clifton, N.J.). 2004; 263:33–44.
Shatalin K, Gusarov I, Avetissova E, Shatalina Y, McQuade LE, Lippard SJ, Nudler E. Bacillus
anthracis-derived nitric oxide is essential for pathogen virulence and survival in macrophages.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 2008;
105:1009–1013. [PubMed: 18215992]
Slipczuk L, Codolosa JN, Davila CD, Romero-Corral A, Yun J, Pressman GS, Figueredo VM.
Infective endocarditis epidemiology over five decades: a systematic review. PloS one. 2013;
8:e82665. [PubMed: 24349331]
Smith JJ, McFeters GA. Mechanisms of INT (2-(4-iodophenyl)-3-(4-nitrophenyl)-5-phenyltetrazolium
chloride), and CTC (5-cyano-2,3-ditolyl tetrazolium chloride) reduction in Escherichia coli K-12.
Journal of Microbiological Methods. 1997; 29:161–175.
Somerville GA, Chaussee MS, Morgan CI, Fitzgerald JR, Dorward DW, Reitzer LJ, Musser JM.
Staphylococcus aureus aconitase inactivation unexpectedly inhibits post-exponential-phase growth
and enhances stationary-phase survival. Infection and immunity. 2002; 70:6373–6382. [PubMed:
12379717]
Somerville GA, Proctor RA. At the crossroads of bacterial metabolism and virulence factor synthesis
in Staphylococci. Microbiology and molecular biology reviews : MMBR. 2009; 73:233–248.
[PubMed: 19487727]
Somerville GA, Said-Salim B, Wickman JM, Raffel SJ, Kreiswirth BN, Musser JM. Correlation of
acetate catabolism and growth yield in Staphylococcus aureus: implications for host-pathogen
interactions. Infection and immunity. 2003; 71:4724–4732. [PubMed: 12874354]
Stone JR, Sands RH, Dunham WR, Marletta MA. Electron paramagnetic resonance spectral evidence
for the formation of a pentacoordinate nitrosyl-heme complex on soluble guanylate cyclase.
Biochemical and biophysical research communications. 1995; 207:572–577. [PubMed: 7864845]
Strasters KC, Winkler KC. Carbohydrate Metabolism OF Staphylococcus aureus. Journal of general
microbiology. 1963; 33:213–229. [PubMed: 14121198]
Sudhamsu J, Crane BR. Bacterial nitric oxide synthases: what are they good for? Trends in
microbiology. 2009; 17:212–218. [PubMed: 19375324]
Surdel MC, Dutter BF, Sulikowski GA, Skaar EP. Bacterial Nitric Oxide Synthase Is Required for the
Staphylococcus aureus Response to Heme Stress. ACS Infect Dis. 2016; 2:572–578. [PubMed:
27626297]
Tinberg CE, Tonzetich ZJ, Wang H, Do LH, Yoda Y, Cramer SP, Lippard SJ. Characterization of iron
dinitrosyl species formed in the reaction of nitric oxide with a biological Rieske center. Journal of
the American Chemical Society. 2010; 132:18168–18176. [PubMed: 21133361]
Toledo JC Jr, Augusto O. Connecting the chemical and biological properties of nitric oxide. Chemical
research in toxicology. 2012; 25:975–989. [PubMed: 22449080]
Vaish M, Singh VK. Antioxidant Functions of Nitric Oxide Synthase in a Methicillin Sensitive
Staphylococcus aureus. International journal of microbiology. 2013; 2013:312146. [PubMed:
23690783]
van der Heijden J, Bosman ES, Reynolds LA, Finlay BB. Direct measurement of oxidative and
nitrosative stress dynamics in Salmonella inside macrophages. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 2015; 112:560–565. [PubMed: 25548165]
van Sorge NM, Beasley FC, Gusarov I, Gonzalez DJ, von Kockritz-Blickwede M, Anik S, Borkowski
AW, Dorrestein PC, Nudler E, Nizet V. Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus bacterial
nitric-oxide synthase affects antibiotic sensitivity and skin abscess development. The Journal of
biological chemistry. 2013; 288:6417–6426. [PubMed: 23322784]
Winger JA, Derbyshire ER, Marletta MA. Dissociation of nitric oxide from soluble guanylate cyclase
and heme-nitric oxide/oxygen binding domain constructs. The Journal of biological chemistry.
2007; 282:897–907. [PubMed: 17098738]
Wink DA, Darbyshire JF, Nims RW, Saavedra JE, Ford PC. Reactions of the bioregulatory agent nitric
oxide in oxygenated aqueous media: determination of the kinetics for oxidation and nitrosation
Mol Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 July 01.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

--- PAGE 25 ---

Mogen et al. Page 25
by intermediates generated in the NO/O2 reaction. Chemical research in toxicology. 1993; 6:23–
27. [PubMed: 8448345]
Wong PS, Eiserich JP, Reddy S, Lopez CL, Cross CE, van der Vliet A. Inactivation of glutathione S-
transferases by nitric oxide-derived oxidants: exploring a role for tyrosine nitration. Archives of
biochemistry and biophysics. 2001; 394:216–228. [PubMed: 11594736]
Yun HY, Dawson VL, Dawson TM. Neurobiology of nitric oxide. Critical reviews in neurobiology.
1996; 10:291–316. [PubMed: 8978984]
Zhou M, Diwu Z, Panchuk-Voloshina N, Haugland RP. A stable nonfluorescent derivative of resorufin
for the fluorometric determination of trace hydrogen peroxide: applications in detecting the
activity of phagocyte NADPH oxidase and other oxidases. Analytical biochemistry. 1997;
253:162–168. [PubMed: 9367498]
Zhu Y, Xiong YQ, Sadykov MR, Fey PD, Lei MG, Lee CY, Bayer AS, Somerville GA. Tricarboxylic
acid cycle-dependent attenuation of Staphylococcus aureus in vivo virulence by selective
inhibition of amino acid transport. Infection and immunity. 2009; 77:4256–4264. [PubMed:
19667045]
Zoraghi R, See RH, Gong H, Lian T, Swayze R, Finlay BB, Brunham RC, McMaster WR, Reiner NE.
Functional analysis, overexpression, and kinetic characterization of pyruvate kinase from
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus. Biochemistry. 2010; 49:7733–7747. [PubMed:
20707314]
Mol Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 July 01.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

--- PAGE 26 ---

Mogen et al. Page 26
Figure 1. Wild-type and nos mutant growth curves
A–B: UAMS-1 wild-type, nos mutant, and complement strains were inoculated to an OD
600
= 0.05 in TSB-G media, and grown with aeration (250 RPM; 1:12.5 volume to flask ratio) at
37°C. Growth over a 24 hour period was monitored by OD measurements (A) and
600
CFU/ml by serial dilution plating (B). C-D: UAMS-1 wild-type and nos mutant cultures
were grown in TSB+G as described above. OD measurements (C) and CFU/ml (D) were
600
determined. Data points represent the average of 3 independent experiments, error bars =
SEM.
Mol Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 July 01.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

--- PAGE 27 ---

Mogen et al. Page 27
Figure 2. SEM analysis of nos mutant
A–C: Cells were harvested from 6 hour TSB-G cultures of wild-type (A), nos mutant (B),
and nos complement (C) strains, and samples of each were prepared for SEM. Images are at
50,000X magnification and are representative of 2 stubs and 12–14 random fields of view/
condition. White scale bar = 0.6 µM. D: Cell length (in nm) was measured using ImageJ by
measuring the largest diameter for all measurable cells in all fields of view. *significance (P
<0.05, Holm-Sidak method) relative to wild-type. Line in box = median; lower and upper
box lines = 25th and 75th percentiles; whiskers = error bars (10th and 90th percentiles); dots =
outliers (5th/9th percentiles).
Mol Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 July 01.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

--- PAGE 28 ---

Mogen et al. Page 28
Figure 3. Distribution of gene functional categories differentially expressed by the nos mutant at
4 hours growth
RNA isolated from 4-hour aerobic wild-type and nos mutant TSB-G cultures was subjected
to RNAseq transcriptome profiling. Differential expression analysis and cutoff criteria were
applied as described in the Materials and Methods. Only genes that met the cutoff criteria
were included in this analysis. Functional classification was completed by NCBI gene
annotations and pathway analysis using BioCyc (Caspi et al., 2014). Total number of down-
regulated genes (fold-change > 2.0; black bars) = 199; total number of up-regulated genes
(fold-change > 2.0; grey bars) = 204.
Mol Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 July 01.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

--- PAGE 29 ---

Mogen et al. Page 29
Figure 4. Intracellular ROS (A), superoxide detection (B), and catalase activity (C) in wild-type
and nos mutant cultures
Wild-type, nos mutant, and complement strains were inoculated to an OD = 0.05 in TSB-
600
G and grown aerobically at 37 °C for 3 hours, followed by CM-H DCFDA staining to detect
2
intracellular ROS (A) or MitoSOX Red staining to detect O (B). After staining, 200 µl
2
aliquots of each cell suspension were immediately transferred in triplicate to a 96-well plate,
and incubated at 37°C in a Synergy HT fluorescent plate reader. Fluorescence and OD
600
measurements were recorded, and data were reported as relative fluorescent units (RFU) per
OD . Catalase (C) activity of protein isolated from 3-hour TSB-G cultures was measured
600
Mol Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 July 01.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

--- PAGE 30 ---

Mogen et al. Page 30
using the Amplex Red Catalase Activity Kit (Life Technologies). All data represent the
average of n = 3 independent experiments and error bars = SEM. *statistical significance (P
<0.001, Tukey test) relative to wild-type; **statistical significance (P <0.05, Holm-Sidak
method) relative to wild-type.
Mol Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 July 01.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

--- PAGE 31 ---

Mogen et al. Page 31
Fig 5. Effect of saNOS on respiration
Membrane potential (A) of aerobic TSB-G cultures after 3 hours growth with addition of
NO donor to wild-type and nos mutant cultures at time of inoculation, as indicated. Cells
pellets were harvested and stained with 30 µM of the membrane potential stain 3,3’-
diethyloxacarbocyanin iodide (DiOC (3)), and subjected to flow cytometry to detect the
2
ratio of red to green fluorescence. Histograms represent the ratio of red to green
fluorescence (X axis) plotted against the number of events (Y axis). A shift to the right of
the vertical black line indicates an increase in membrane potential. CTC staining (B) of
Mol Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 July 01.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

--- PAGE 32 ---

Mogen et al. Page 32
aerobic cultures grown in TSB-G for 3 hours in the presence and absence of NO donor
added at the time of inoculation. Fluorescence (RFU) of harvested cells was measured after
70 minutes of CTC staining with a Biotek Synergy microplate reader, and normalized to the
initial OD reading of each sample. Fold-change was determined by dividing the RFU/
600
OD of each condition by the average of wild-type RFU/OD . Oxygen consumption (C)
600 600
of cultures grown for 3 hours followed by resuspension in fresh aerated 1× PBS. Oxygen
consumption rate (%) was determined using a Clark type electrode by measuring the slope
of the curve and normalizing to CFU/ml. *statistical significance (P <0.001 Holm-Sidak
method) relative to untreated wild-type. Data are representative of n = 6 (A), n = 4 (B), or n
= 6 (C) independent experiments. Error bars = SEM.
Mol Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 July 01.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

--- PAGE 33 ---

Mogen et al. Page 33
Fig 6. Intracellular ROS (A) and aconitase activity (B) upon inhibition of NADH dehydrogenase
Wild-type and nos mutant strains were inoculated to an OD = 0.05 in TSB-G and grown
600
aerobically at 37 °C in the presence of 15 µM Thioridizine HCl. AT 3 hours growth cells
were stained with CM-H DCFDA staining to detect intracellular ROS (A). After staining,
2
200 µl aliquots of each cell suspension were immediately transferred in triplicate to a 96-
well plate, and incubated at 37 °C in a Synergy HT fluorescent plate reader. Fluorescence
and OD measurements were recorded, and data were reported as relative fluorescent units
600
(RFU) per OD . Aconitase (B) activity of protein isolated from 3-hour TSB-G cultures
600
Mol Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 July 01.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

--- PAGE 34 ---

Mogen et al. Page 34
grown in the presence of Thioridizine HCl was measured using the Aconitase Assay Kit
(Cayman Chemical). 1 mg/ml porcine heart aconitase was included as a positive control.
ROS staining represents the average of n = 5 independent experiments while aconitase
activity is representative of n = 6 independent experiments. Error bars = SEM. *statistical
significance (P <0.001, Paired t-test) relative to wild-type; **statistical significance (P <
0.05, Student-Newman-Keuls test) relative to wild-type.
Mol Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 July 01.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

--- PAGE 35 ---

Mogen et al. Page 35
Fig 7. Global gene expression and metabolic changes in a S. aureus nos mutant
Transcriptomic and targeted metabolomics data for the nos mutant relative to wild-type were
mapped to select metabolic pathways using Biocyc software (Biocyc.org). Gene expression
changes (squares) are indicated as fold-change whereas metabolite levels (circles) are
indicated as % increase or decrease. All data was mapped to known and predicted pathways
for MRSA252.
Mol Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 July 01.
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript

--- PAGE 36 ---

Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Author
Manuscript
Mogen et al. Page 36
Table 1
Targeted metabolomics summary
Cellular Metabolite % increase/decrease P-value
nos mutant vs wild- (Two tailed t-test)
type
Organic Acids
Lactate −48.5 0.010
Citrate −30.0 0.151
α-ketoglutarate −53.5 0.037
Fumarate 157.5 0.060
Malate 62.4 0.195
Pyruvate 27.0 0.663
Amino Acids
Citrulline 149.0 0.002
Glutamine −63.4 0.212
Glutamate −56.6 0.004
Ornithine −30.3 0.059
Leucine −38.2 0.007
Isoleucine −41.4 0.018
Valine −40.4 0.005
Histidine 228.0 0.044
Arginine 1.5 0.936
Adenine Nucleotide
NADH −64.9 0.015
NAD+ −23.4 0.084
NAD/NADH 121.7 0.106
ATP −10.4 0.830
ADP/ATP −24.6 0.668
Mol Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 July 01.