--- PAGE 1 --- <BLANKLINE> Contribution of the nos-pdtOperon to Virulence Phenotypes in Methicillin-Sensitive Staphylococcus aureus April M. Sapp1., Austin B. Mogen1., Erin A. Almand2, Frances E. Rivera3, Lindsey N. Shaw3, Anthony R. Richardson4, Kelly C. Rice1* 1DepartmentofMicrobiologyandCellScience,UniversityofFlorida,Gainesville,Florida,UnitedStatesofAmerica,2DepartmentofMicrobiology,NorthCarolinaState University,Raleigh,NorthCarolina,UnitedStatesofAmerica,3DepartmentofCellBiology,MicrobiologyandMolecularBiology,UniversityofSouthFlorida,Tampa, Florida,UnitedStatesofAmerica,4DepartmentofMicrobiologyandImmunology,UniversityofNorthCarolinaatChapelHill,ChapelHill,NorthCarolina,UnitedStatesof America Abstract Nitricoxide(NO)isemergingasanimportantregulatorofbacterialstressresistance,biofilmdevelopment,andvirulence. One potential source of endogenous NO production in the pathogen Staphylococcus aureus is its NO-synthase (saNOS) enzyme, encoded by the nos gene. Although a role for saNOS in oxidative stress resistance, antibiotic resistance, and virulence has been recently-described, insights into the regulation of nos expression and saNOS enzyme activity remain elusive.Tothisend,transcriptionalanalysisofthenosgeneinS.aureusstrainUAMS-1wasperformed,whichrevealedthat nos expression increases during low-oxygen growth and is growth-phase dependent. Furthermore, nos is co-transcribed with a downstream gene, designated pdt, which encodes a prephenate dehydratase (PDT) enzyme involved in phenylalaninebiosynthesis.DeletionofpdtsignificantlyimpairedtheabilityofUAMS-1togrowinchemically-definedmedia lacking phenylalanine, confirming the function of this enzyme. Bioinformatics analysis revealed that the operon organizationofnos-pdtappearstobeuniquetothestaphylococci.AsdescribedforotherS.aureusnosmutants,inactivation of nos in UAMS-1 conferred sensitivity to oxidative stress, while deletion of pdt did not affect this phenotype. The nos mutantalsodisplayedreducedvirulenceinamurinesepsisinfectionmodel,andincreasedcarotenoidpigmentationwhen cultured on agar plates, both previously-undescribed nos mutant phenotypes. Utilizing the fluorescent stain 4-Amino-5Methylamino-2’,7’-Difluorofluorescein (DAF-FM) diacetate, decreased levels of intracellular NO/reactive nitrogen species (RNS) were detected in the nos mutant on agar plates. These results reinforce the important role of saNOS in S. aureus physiology and virulence, and have identified an in vitro growth condition under which saNOS activity appears to be upregulated.However,thesignificanceoftheoperonorganizationofnos-pdtandpotentialrelationshipbetweenthesetwo enzymesremains tobe elucidated. Citation:SappAM,MogenAB,AlmandEA,RiveraFE,ShawLN,etal.(2014)Contributionofthenos-pdtOperontoVirulencePhenotypesinMethicillin-Sensitive Staphylococcusaureus.PLoSONE9(10):e108868.doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0108868 Editor:NancyE.Freitag,UniversityofIllinoisatChicagoCollegeofMedicine,UnitedStatesofAmerica ReceivedJune18,2014;AcceptedSeptember4,2014;PublishedOctober2,2014 Thisisanopen-accessarticle,freeofallcopyright,andmaybefreelyreproduced,distributed,transmitted,modified,builtupon,orotherwiseusedbyanyonefor anylawfulpurpose.TheworkismadeavailableundertheCreativeCommonsCC0publicdomaindedication. DataAvailability:Theauthorsconfirmthatalldataunderlyingthefindingsarefullyavailablewithoutrestriction.Allrelevantdataarewithinthepaperandits SupportingInformationfiles. Funding:Thisworkwassupportedinpartbythefollowingsources:AirForceInstituteofTechnologyCivilianInstitutionProgramScholarship(http://m.airforce. com/benefits/air-force-institute-of-technology) to EAA, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (http://www.niaid.nih.gov/Pages/default.aspx) 1P01AI083211sub-awardtoKCR,ResubmissionfundingfromtheUniversityofFloridaEmergingPathogensInstitute(http://epi.ufl.edu/news-and-events/episeed-funding-and-resubmission-support/)toKCR,UFInstituteofFoodandAgriculturalSciencesEarlyCareerAwardtoKCR,NationalInstituteofAllergyand InfectiousDiseases(http://www.niaid.nih.gov/Pages/default.aspx)grantAI093613toARR,andNationalInstituteofAllergyandInfectiousDiseases(http://www. niaid.nih.gov/Pages/default.aspx)grantAI080626toLNS.Thefundershadnoroleinstudydesign,datacollectionandanalysis,decisiontopublish,orpreparation ofthemanuscript. CompetingInterests:Theauthorshavedeclaredthatnocompetinginterestsexist. *Email:kcrice@ufl.edu .Theseauthorscontributedequallytothiswork. Introduction which together catalyze a five-electron heme-based oxidation of theguanidinenitrogenofL-argininetoL-citrulline[7].Thepower NitricOxide(NO)isahighlyreactivefreeradicalgasthateasily andversatilityofNOasasignalingmoleculeisexemplifiedbyits and rapidly diffuses across biological membranes [1,2]. One ability to diffuse several cell diameters away from its site of cellularsourceofNOproductionisviatheNOsynthaseenzymes synthesisineukaryotes[1,10].NOcanreactdirectlyorindirectly (NOS), whose three isoforms are well-characterized in mammals viaformationofreactivenitrogenspecies(RNS)withavarietyof andareinvolvedinawidevarietyofcellularprocesses,including cellular targets, including DNA, lipids, and proteins containing regulation of blood pressure, nervous system signaling, and transition metal centers andthiolgroups (reviewed in [11]). protection against pathogens [3–9]. All three mammalian NOS enzymes consist of both an oxygenase and reductase domain, PLOSONE | www.plosone.org 1 October2014 | Volume 9 | Issue 10 | e108868 <BLANKLINE> --- PAGE 2 --- <BLANKLINE> Staphylococcusaureusnos-pdtOperon A number of studies in recent years have revealed that some mutantdisplayedreducedvirulenceinamurinesepsismodeland bacterialspeciesalsocontainaNOShomologueintheirgenomes, increased carotenoid pigmentation when cultured on agar plates, equivalent in most cases to the oxygenase domain of eukaryotic both previously-undescribed nos mutant phenotypes. An assay to NOS (reviewed in [3]). The role of bacterial NOS can be quite detect intracellular NO/RNS in S. aureus was also developed varied, participating in diverse physiological functions such as using the fluorescent stain DAF-FM diacetate, and demonstrated biofilm development, biosynthesis of plant phytotoxins, stress decreasedlevelsofintracellularNO/RNSinthenosmutantwhen resistanceandvirulence[12–18].Althoughthisversatilitysuggests cultured on agar plates. aspecificityoffunctiontoindividualbacterialspecies,anincreased understanding of the regulation and exact cellular targets of Materials and Methods bacterial NOS may help divulge an evolutionary link between prokaryotic and eukaryotic organisms. Previous analysis of Bacterial strains and growth conditions bacterial genomes has shown that bacterial NOS enzymes are EscherichiacoliandStaphylococcusaureusstrainsandplasmids primarily found in Gram-positive species such as Streptomyces, used in this study are listed in Table1. Planktonic S. aureus Bacillus, and the staphylococci [3]. A number of biochemical culturesweregrowneitheraerobically(1:10volumetoflaskratio, studies have focused on determining the crystal structure and 250 RPM) or under low-oxygen conditions (7:10 volume to flask characterizing the enzymatic activity of these bacterial NOS ratio, 0 RPM), as indicated for each experiment. S. aureus was enzymes(reviewedin[4]).Bycomparison,muchlessisunderstood freshlystreakedfromafrozenstockontotrypticsoyagar(TSA)for abouttheregulationofbacterialNOSenzymeexpression,activity, 24hours, followed by overnight aerobic growth in tryptic soy and participationin cellsignaling. broth (TSB) for each experiment, unless otherwise indicated. As Staphylococcus aureus is a versatile pathogen that is highly indicated, antibiotics were included in agar plates and broth transmissibleinhealthcaresettingsaswellasinthecommunityat- cultures at the following concentrations: 5 mg/ml or 10mg/ml large. Of increasing concern is the fact that many methicillin- chloramphenicol(Cm),2mg/mlor10mg/mlerythromycin(Erm). resistant S. aureus (MRSA) strains are genetically-resistant to E.coliwasroutinelygrownunderaerobicconditions(1:10volume nearlyallantibioticscurrentlyusedintheclinicalsetting.Infact,a toflaskratio,250RPM)inLuria-Bertani(LB)brothwith50 mg/ recentreportbytheCDCestimatesthat80,000MRSAinfections mlampicillin(Amp)or50mg/mlkanamycin(Km),asindicatedin and 11,000 MRSA-associated deaths occur in the US per year Table 1. Glycerol stock cultures of all strains were maintained at [19]. These alarming statistics underscore the importance of 280uC and were prepared by mixing equal volume of overnight deciphering new drug targets to expand our arsenal against this culture withsterile 50% (vol/vol)glycerol incryogenic tubes. devastating pathogen. Bacterial NOS enzymes are an attractive targetfordrugdevelopment,sincetheyhavebeenshowntoconfer Creation of nos::erm and Dpdt mutant strains tolerance to oxidative stress [14,15,20] and antibiotics [18,21], To create a nos::erm insertion mutant, plasmid pTR27 promote bacterial survival inside neutrophils [20] and macro- (Table 1) was created as follows: The nos gene was amplified phages [14,21], and contribute to virulence in vivo [14,21]. A fromS.aureusgenomicDNAbyPCRusingthenos1-Fandnos1search for small molecule inhibitors of Bacillus subtilis NOS has R primers specified in Table2, followed by Topo-cloning into alsorecentlybeenundertakenanddescribed[22].Withrespectto pCR2.1 (Invitrogen). An internal BglII site was introduced into S. aureus, exogenous addition of NO to cultures protects this this cloned sequence 232 bp downstream from the saNOS start bacterium fromchallenge withH O andantimicrobials [15,18]. codon in the sequence 5’-gttaaatgtcattgatgcaagAGATGTtactgac2 2 More recent studies of S. aureus nos mutants have revealed that gaagcatcgttcttatc-3’,wherethecapitallettersarelocated,changing this gene contributes to a number of virulence properties, the sequence from AGATGT to AGATCT, a BglII restriction including protection against oxidative stress [20,21], antibiotics enzymecutsite.AnEcoRIfragmentharboringthismodifiedallele [21],antimicrobialpeptides[21],andleucocyte-killing[20,21].A wasmovedintotheEcoRIsiteofpBluescriptSK(pBSK),avector roleforsaNOSinS.aureusvirulencewasalsorecentlyconfirmed backbone that does not contain a BglII site. A 1.1 kb BamHIin a murine abscess model of infection [21]. Although multiple digested fragment harboring the erm resistance cassette from modelsinfertheimportanceofbacterialNOSduringinfection,the Tn1545 [24] was then cloned into the BglII site of the nos exact molecular mechanisms by which NOS elicits its control on fragment cloned in pBSK. The resulting nos::erm allele was bacterialstressresistanceandvirulencehavenotbeenelucidated. subsequently ligated into the EcoRI site of the temperature GiventheestablishedrelevanceofsaNOSinvirulenceandasa sensitiveshuttlevectorpBT2[25]togeneratepTR27,whichwas potential drug development target [22], it is surprising that firsttransformedintostrainRN4220byelectroporation,followed relativelylittleattentionhasbeengiventothegenetics,regulation, byphagetransductionintoUAMS-1,withgrowthat30uCforall andtheexactcellular targetsofthisenzyme.Inspectionofthe S. steps [26–28]. To create strain KR1010 (UAMS-1 nos::erm aureus genome has revealed that the nos open reading frame mutant),integrationofpTR27intothenosgeneontheUAMS-1 (ORF; SAR2007 of the MRSA252 genome) is separated by only chromosomewasinitiatedbygrowthat43uConTSA+10mg/ml 19 nucleotides from the downstream SAR2008 ORF. No Erm (non-permissive temperature for plasmid replication), to identifiable transcriptionterminationsignalsappeartobepresent promote integration of the plasmid into the chromosome via betweennosandSAR2008,suggestingthattheymaycomprisean homologous recombination at the nos gene. To induce a second operon.SAR2008(henceforthreferredtoasthepdtgene)encodes recombinationevent,asingleisolatedcolonywasusedtoinoculate a prephenate dehydratase (saPDT) enzyme, which catalyzes the TSB(noantibiotic)andgrownat30uCfor5days.Every24hours, formation of phenylpyruvate from prephenate during phenylala- analiquotoftheculturewasdiluted1000-foldintofreshTSB(no nine biosynthesis [23]. Therefore, this current study was under- antibiotic). On days 3–5, the culture was serially-diluted and taken to probe the potential genetic and functional relationships spread on TSA +10mg/ml Erm, and isolated colonies were then between saNOS and saPDT in a clinical methicillin-sensitive S. screened for Erm-resistant and Cm-sensitive phenotypes by aureusstrain.Theseexperimentsdemonstratethatthenosandpdt picking and patching onto TSA +2 mg/ml Erm and TSA + genesareco-transcribed,andthattheexpressionofthisoperonis 5 mg/ml Cm. PCR using the nos1-F and nos1-R primer pair, as upregulated during low-oxygen growth. Furthermore, a nos::erm well as Southernblotting, were usedtoscreen candidate mutants PLOSONE | www.plosone.org 2 October2014 | Volume 9 | Issue 10 | e108868 <BLANKLINE> --- PAGE 3 --- <BLANKLINE> Staphylococcusaureusnos-pdtOperon Table1. Bacterial strains andplasmid constructs used inthisstudy. Strainorplasmidname Description Referenceorsource Escherichiacoli DH5a Hoststrainforconstructionofrecombinantplasmids [68] Staphylococcusaureus RN4220 Easilytransformablerestrictiondeficientstrain [69] UAMS-1 Osteomyelitisclinicalisolate [70] KR1010 UAMS-1nos::erminsertionmutant Thiswork KR1013 UAMS-1Dpdtdeletionmutant Thiswork Plasmids pTR27 nos::ermallele-replacementplasmid;ErmR/CmR Thiswork pKR13 Dpdtallele-replacementplasmid;CmR Thiswork pMKnos noscomplementationplasmid;CmR/AmpR Thiswork pMKpdt pdtcomplementationplasmid;CmR/AmpR Thiswork pCRBlunt E.colicloningplasmid;KmR Invitrogen pCR2.1 E.colicloningplasmid;KmR/AmpR Invitrogen pBSK E.colicloningplasmid;AmpR Stratagene pBT2 Temperature-sensitiveshuttlevector;CmR/AmpR [25] pMK4 Shuttlevector;CmR/AmpR [29] doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0108868.t001 to confirm that the chromosomal nos gene had been correctly pCRBlunt by restriction digestion with HindIII-ClaI and ClaIreplaced by thenos::erm allele. XbaI, respectively, followed by gel-purification of each insert To create a Dpdt deletion mutant, plasmid pKR13 (Table 1) (DNA Gel Extraction Kit, Zymo Research). Plasmid pBT2 was was created as follows: PCR was performed with primer pairs digestedwithHindIII-XbaI,anda‘‘triple’’ligationreactionusing pdt1-F/pdt1-R (amplifying the 1.2-kb region upstream of nucle- T4 DNA ligase (New England Biolabs) containing this linearized otide 151 of the pdt open reading frame), and pdt2-F/pdt2-R plasmid,HindIII-ClaIpdt1andClaI-XbaIpdt2wasincubatedfor (amplifyingthe1.0-kbregiondownstreamofnucleotide672ofthe several hours at room temperature, followed by heat-shock pdt ORF) using AccuPrimeTM Pfx SuperMix (Invitrogen Life transformation into E. coli DH5a. The resulting pKR13 was Technologies) and UAMS-1 genomic DNA as template. Each moved into S. aureus RN4220 and UAMS-1 by electroporation PCR product was cloned into pCRBlunt (Invitrogen Life andphagetransduction,respectively,asdescribedabove.Creation Technologies) following the manufacturer’s protocols for ligation of strain KR1013 (UAMS-1 Dpdt mutant) was performed as and E. coli transformation, followed by Sanger DNA sequencing described above, except that isolated colonies recovered after (ICBR,UniversityofFlorida)toverifythatnomutationshadbeen induction of the second recombination event were screened for introduced. The pdt1 and pdt2 inserts were each excised from chloramphenicolsensitivitybypickingandpatchingontoTSA(no Table2. PCRprimers used inthis study. Primer Purpose Sequence(59-39;lowercaselettersrepresentadditionofrestrictionsite) nos1-Fnos1-R nos::ermmutantcreation GTTAGTTACCAAAGCATAATTGCGATCTGCCACAATGTTGATTGTTCC nos2-Fnos2-R noscomplement cccggatccGTTTCTATTAATTGCGCTTGAcccgaattcTGCTATACCTCTACTAACTTAATGAT nos3-Fnos3-R nospromoter cccggatccTGTTTCTATTAATTGCGCTTGAAccccccgggGCTTTATATTATAGTCTAC nos4-Fnos4-R real-timePCR TATGGTGCTAAAATGGCTTGACGATGCTTCGTCAGTAACA nos5-Fpdt5-R co-transcriptionPCR ccccatatgTTATTTAAAGAGGCTCAAGCTTTCcccctcgagATTAAAAGCACCAATCA pdt1-Fpdt1-R Dpdtmutantcreation TTTAAAGAGGCTCAAGCTTTCACAACACCAATCGATGTGTCA pdt2-Fpdt2-R Dpdtmutantcreation CAATTAGGTATGTATCGATTTTTCGccctctagaAAACAAAAGTTAGACGAGCTTGG pdt3-Fpdt3-R pdtcomplement ccccccgggCATCATTAAGTTAGTAGAGGTATAGCAcccgaattcACGAGTGGTAACGAAACGTA pdt4-Fpdt4-R real-timePCR TGGGTTGTTAGCAAGTGTGCGCCTGAACGAAAAATCGATAC sigA-FsigA-R real-timePCR CAAGCAATCACTCGTGCAATGGTGCTGGATCTCGACCTAA asp23-Fasp23-R real-timePCR ATTGCTGGTATCGCTGCACTTGTTGCCACTTGAGAATGC purH-FpurH-R real-timePCR CGAAATAAACCGCAGCATTTTCGTCACATCAGGGTTAGCA crtN-FcrtN-R real-timePCR CAGTGATTGGTGCAGGTGTCCATACGCCCGCCTACATTAT doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0108868.t002 PLOSONE | www.plosone.org 3 October2014 | Volume 9 | Issue 10 | e108868 <BLANKLINE> --- PAGE 4 --- <BLANKLINE> Staphylococcusaureusnos-pdtOperon antibiotic)andTSA+5 mg/mlCm.PCRwithprimersnos2-Fand to check for amplification of contaminating genomicDNA. Each pdt2-Rwasusedtoscreencandidatemutantstoconfirmthat521- RNA sample (0.750mg) was then converted to cDNA using the bp ofthepdtgene hadbeendeleted. iScript Reverse Transcriptase kit (BioRad), which generates total cDNAusingamixtureofoligo(dT)andrandomhexamerprimers. Creation of complementation plasmids Expression of genes of interest (Table 2) was measured in the To create pMKnos, primer pair nos2-F/nos2-R and Therma- cDNA from each sample by qRT-PCR using iQ SYBR green laceenzyme(InvitrogenLifeSciences)wasusedtoPCR-amplifya supermix(BioRad)andtheEcoReal-TimePCRsystem(Illumina). TheLivakmethod(2-DDCt)[31]wasusedtocalculatetherelative 1.6 kb product (spanning 564 nucleotides upstream of the nos fold change between the calibrator (indicated in each figure ATG start codon through the entire nos ORF), using UAMS-1 legend)andtestsamples.Primersspecifictothehousekeepinggene genomic DNA as template. This PCR product was cloned into sigA (sigA-F/sigA-R) were used to normalize the data. The pCRBlunt (Invitrogen Life Technologies) according to the amplification efficiency of sigA-F/sigA-R was within 5% of all of manufacturer’s protocols for ligation and E. coli transformation, theotherprimerpairsusedinqRT-PCR.AllqRT-PCRreactions followed by Sanger DNA sequencing to verify that no mutations were performed on triplicate technical replicates of each RNA had been introduced. This DNA fragment was excised from isolated fromn=3 biological samples. pCRBlunt by restriction digestion with BamHI and EcoRI, gelpurified,andligatedtoBamHI-EcoRIdigestedpMK4[29].This Co-transcription PCR ligation wastransformed into E.coli,followed bymovementinto S. aureus RN4220 and KR1010 by electroporation and phage Todeterminewhetherthenosandpdtgenesareco-transcribed, transduction,respectively,asdescribedabove.TocreatepMKpdt, 0.750 mg of UAMS-1 RNA isolated from 6 hour low-oxygen primer pair nos3-F/nos3-R was used to PCR-amplify a product cultures(n=3biologicalreplicates)wasconvertedtocDNAusing the iScript select cDNA kit (BioRad) and primer pdt5-R, which spanning 564 nucleotides upstream of the nos ATG start codon, and primer pair pdt3-F/pdt3-R was used to amplify a 0.97 kb anneals to the stop codon region of the pdt gene. As a control, these reactions were also performed in the absence of reverseproduct spanning the pdt ORF. Each PCR product was cloned transcriptase (RT) enzyme, to check for genomic DNA contaminto pCRBlunt (Invitrogen Life Technologies) following the ination. PCR reactions (30 cycles) were then performed on manufacturer’s protocols for ligation and E. coli transformation, 0.075 mg of each RT+ and RT- cDNA sample, as well as a followedbySangerDNAsequencing.Thenospromoterfragment UAMS-1 genomic DNA template control and no template was excised from pCRBlunt by restriction digestion with BamHI control. Primer pair nos5-F/pdt5-R was used to amplify a 1.9and SmaI, gel-purified, and ligated to BamHI-SmaI digested kbproductthatspanstheregionbetweenthenosstartcodonand pMK4 and transformed into E. coli. The resulting plasmid was pdt stop codon. PCR products were visualized by agarose gel thendigestedwithSmaIandEcoRI,andligatedtothe0.97-kbpdt electrophoresis and ethidium bromide staining, and imaged on a insert that was excised from pCRBlunt by digestion with these Molecular Imager GelDoc XR+(BioRad). sametwoenzymes.ThisligationwasthentransformedintoE.coli, followed by movement into S. aureus RN4220, KR1010, and Carotenoid pigment assays KR1013byelectroporationandphagetransduction,respectively, as described above. S. aureus UAMS-1, KR1010, and KR1013 ThepigmentdifferencesinUAMS-1(pMK4),nos::ermmutant (pMK4),noscomplement(nos::ermmutantcontainingpMKnos), were also transduced with pMK4 to create vector-only control and pdt complement (nos::erm mutant containing pMKpdt) strains. strainswerequantitativelyassessedusingamodifiedmethodfrom Morikawaetal.[32].Inbrief,eachstrainwasgrownat37uCon Growth experiments and RNA isolation TSA +5 mg/ml Cm. After 48hours growth, cells were scraped Tomeasuregrowth-phasedependentexpressionofnosandpdt, from each plate, suspended in 1 ml dH O, and centrifuged for overnightculturesofUAMS-1weredilutedtoanOD =0.05in 2 600 3 minutes at 13,000 RPM. The supernatants were removed and TSB,andweregrowninbothaerobicandlow-oxygenconditions cells were washed and centrifuged a second time as described as described above (n=3 biological replicates). Culture samples above. Cell pellets were then resuspended in 420ml methanol, were harvested from each flask at 2, 6,and 12hours growth.To vortexedfor10seconds,and20 mlwaswithdrawntomeasurethe compare nos and pdt expression between UAMS-1 (pMK4), OD ofeachsuspension.Theremaining400mlwasincubatedat nos::erm mutant (pMK4) and nos::erm complement (pMKnos) 600 55uC for 5 minutes, and then centrifuged at 13,000 RPM for strains,culturesofeach(n=3biologicalreplicates)weregrownfor 2 minutes. Finally, 350ml supernatant (containing extracted 6 hours under low-oxygen conditions. To compare expression of pigments)waswithdrawnfromeachtube,transferredtoacuvette nos, pdt, and various carotenoid pigment-related genes (Table 2) containing650mlmethanol,andtheabsorbanceofeachsampleat between UAMS-1 (pMK4), nos::erm mutant (pMK4), nos com465nm. All samples were standardized by dividing the A 465 plement (nos::erm mutant containing pMKnos) and pdt complereading by the sample’s corresponding relative OD value 600 ment (nos::erm mutant containing pMKpdt) strains, cultures of [calculated bydividingtheOD ofeachsamplebytheaverage 600 each(n=3biologicalreplicates)weregrownfor28hoursonTSA OD ofUAMS-1(pMK4)],toaccountforslightvariationsinthe 600 +5mg/ml Cm. For all experiments, RNA was isolated with the amount of cells harvested from the agar plates. This experiment FASTPREP system (Lysing Matrix B, Q-Biogene, Inc.) and was performed onn=3 independent experiments per strain. QiagenRNeasyminikit,usingpreviously-publishedmethods[30]. Assessment of phenylalanine biosynthesis Quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR) analysis of gene To determine if saPDT is required for phenylalanine biosynexpression thesis, UAMS-1 (pMK4), nos::erm mutant (pMK4), Dpdt mutant Toremoveresidualgenomiccontamination,isolatedRNAwas (pMK4), and corresponding complement strains were grown in treated with Turbo DNase using the TURBO DNA-freeTM kit chemically-defined media (CDM) [33] in the presence and (AppliedBiosystems).AmockqRT-PCRwasthenperformedwith absence of phenylalanine. In brief, each strain was cultured primer pair sigA-F/sigA-R and DNAse-treated RNA as template overnight in TSB containing 5 mg/ml Cm, followed by centrifuPLOSONE | www.plosone.org 4 October2014 | Volume 9 | Issue 10 | e108868 <BLANKLINE> --- PAGE 5 --- <BLANKLINE> Staphylococcusaureusnos-pdtOperon gationtoharvestcells.CellpelletswereeachwashedonceinCDM in LB broth (+ selective antibiotic, as needed), and grown lackingphenylalanine,thenresuspendedinthesamemedia.These overnight at 37uC and 250 RPM. These cultures were diluted to washedcellsuspensionswerethenusedtoinoculate1mlofCDM an OD =0.05 in 20ml LB (no antibiotic) in a 250ml 600 with phenylalanine or CDM lacking phenylalanine to an Erlenmeyer flask. After growth for 4.75–5 hours at 37uC and OD 600 =0.02. Aliquots (200ml) of each diluted culture were 250RPM,1mlwasremovedforserialdilution,trackplating[34] transferred in triplicate to wells of a 96-well tissue culture plate and CFU/ml determination, and the remaining culture was (Costar3596),andgrownat37uC.OD 600 readingsweremeasured incubatedinthepresenceof250mMH 2 O 2 for2 hours.Afterthis inaSynergyHTmicroplatereader(Biotek)every2hoursovera 2hourtreatment,1mlofculturewasremovedfromeachflaskfor 24hourgrowthperiod.Thisexperimentwasperformedonn=4 serial dilutionand trackplating todetermine CFU/ml. biological replicates (acquired in 2 independent experiments) per strain. Murine model of sepsis and dissemination These experiments were conducted as described previously Fluorescent detection of endogenous NO/RNS [35,36]. Briefly, 6 week old, female CD-1 Swiss mice were To detect intracellular accumulation of NO and RNS in S. purchased from Charles River Laboratories, and housed at the aureus, a fluorescent assay using the cell-permeable stain 4- vivariumintheCollegeofMedicine,UniversityofSouthFlorida. Amino-5-Methylamino-2’,7’-Difluorofluorescein (DAF-FM) Diac- Animalswerehousedinstandardmetalcages(2percage),withad etate (Invitrogen Life Technologies) was developed. To validate libitumfoodandwateraccess.Forinfectionpurposes,previouslythe use of this stain as a measure of intracellular NO/RNS in S. stocked cultures of UAMS-1 and KR1010 were thawed, washed aureus,strainUAMS-1wasgrownovernightinTSBsupplement- twice in PBS, and diluted in PBS to 16109 CFU/ml. Mice were ed with 3% (wt/vol) NaCl and 0.5% (wt/vol) glucose (TSBrandomly assorted into two groups (n=9 mice per strain) and NaGlc).OvernightcultureswerethendilutedtoanOD =0.05 600 subsequentlyinoculatedbytailveininjectionwith100mlbacterial inTSB-NaGlc,and1 mlaliquotsweretransferredtowellsofa24- suspension, giving a final inocula of 16108CFU/ml. The welltissuecultureplate(Costar3524;previouslycoatedovernight infectionwasallowedtoproceedfor7days,oruntilmicereached at4uCwith20%humanplasma)andgrownfor7 hoursat37uC. apre-moribundstate(usedasameasureofmortality).Micewere Following growth, the total well (biofilm + supernatant) was monitored every 3 hours for the first 24hours after inoculation, harvested, centrifuged and cell pellets were resuspended in 16 then every 8hours (up to 72hours post-inoculation), and twice Hank’s Buffered Salt Solution (HBSS) buffer containing 5 mM daily for the remaining infection period. The criteria used for DAF-FMdiacetate.Cellsuspensionswereincubatedfor1hourat determining the pre-moribund state included development of a 37uC,thencellswerecollectedbycentrifugation,washedoncein hunched posture, labored breathing, decreased activity,immobilHBSS buffer, and resuspended in HBSS alone (‘‘untreated’’) or ity, inability to eat or drink, and ruffled fur. Mice were then HBSSsupplementedwith100mMDiethylamine(DEA;Sigma)or euthanized with carbon dioxide, and death was verified by the 100mMDEA/NO(CaymanChemicals).Aliquots(200 ml)ofeach cessation of cardiovascular and respiratory activity. The liver, untreatedortreatedcellsuspensionwereimmediatelytransferred kidneys,heart,andlungswerecollectedandstoredat280uC.Any in triplicate to wells of a Costar 3904 96-well plate, which was mousesacrificedbeforeday7wasrecordedformortality,andtheir incubated at 37uC in a Biotek Synergy HT fluorescent plate organswerestoredforenumeratingbacterialburden.Eachorgan reader. Fluorescence (EX/EM 485610/516610) and OD 600 wassubsequentlyhomogenizedin3 mlsterilePBS,andtheCFU/ measurements were recorded after 30minutes, and data were organ determined via serial dilution and viable count enumerareported as relative fluorescent units (RFU) per OD of each 600 tion. This study was performed in strict accordance with the well. Where indicated, 2-(4-carboxyphenyl)-4,5-dihydro-4,4,5,5recommendations in the Guide for the Care and Use of tetramethyl-1H-imidazolyl-1-oxy-3-oxide, monopotassium salt Laboratory Animals of the National Institutes of Health. The (cPTIO), an NO scavenger, was added to cell suspensions to a protocolwasapprovedbytheInstitutionalAnimalCareandUse concentration of 150mM during the 1 hour DAF-FM staining step. CommitteeoftheUniversityofSouthFlorida(PermitNumber:ATodeterminetherelativelevelsofendogenousNO/RNSofS. 4100-01). aureus when grown on TSA plates, UAMS-1 (pMK4), nos::erm mutant (pMK4), nos complement (nos::erm mutant containing Statistical analyses pMKnos) and pdt complement (nos::erm mutant containing Allstatisticalanalysesusedfortheinvivodatawereperformed pMKpdt) strains were cultured for 26hours on TSA +5mg/ml using SAS software (version 9.2, SAS Institute, Cary, NC). The Cm. Cells were harvested from each plate by scraping with a distribution of data was determined in SAS through tests for steriletoothpick,andresuspendedin1mlHBSS.Cellpelletswere normality (SAS proc univariate) and equality of variance (SAS harvested by centrifugation, washed once in HBSS buffer, and procttest).Thestatisticalsignificanceofbacterialrecoveryfromthe then resuspended in HBSS containing 5 mM DAF-FM. Aliquots murinemodelofsepsiswasevaluatedusingaMann-WhitneyTest. (200 ml) of cell suspension were immediately transferred in Mortality was measured using a Log Rank and Chi-square test quadruplicate to wells of a Costar 3904 96-well plate, which was with 1-degree of freedom. For all in vivo statistical analyses the incubated at 37uC in a Synergy HT fluorescent plate reader. significancelevelwassetata=0.05.Invitroassaysweresubjected Fluorescence and OD 600 measurements were recorded after tostatisticalanalysisusingSigmaplotversion12.5software(Build 90minutes, and data were reported as RFU per OD 600 of each 12.5.0.38, Systat Software, Inc.). Data were tested for normality well. andequalvariance,thenanalyzedwithaparametric(ifnormality and/or equal variance tests passed) or non-parametric (if Hydrogen peroxide sensitivity assay normality and/or equal variance tests failed) one-way ANOVA, The sensitivity of UAMS-1 (pMK4), nos::erm mutant (pMK4), followed by an appropriate multiple-comparison test to detect Dpdt mutant (pMK4), and corresponding complement strains differences between individualgroups. were assessed for sensitivity to H O based on the method 2 2 reportedbyNudleretal.[15].Inbrief,eachstrainwasinoculated PLOSONE | www.plosone.org 5 October2014 | Volume 9 | Issue 10 | e108868 <BLANKLINE> --- PAGE 6 --- <BLANKLINE> Staphylococcusaureusnos-pdtOperon Results growth compared to aerobic growth. Furthermore, expression of both of these genes was growth-phase dependent, peaking at late The S. aureus nos and pdt genes comprise a exponentialgrowthphase,anddeclininginstationaryphase.Coco-transcribed operon transcription of nos and pdt was verified by synthesizing cDNA Inspection of the S. aureus nos genomic region revealed the fromUAMS-1RNAusingaprimerthatannealstothe3’endof presence of an ORF located only 19-bp downstream of the nos thepdtgene,followedbyPCRusingprimersdesignedtoamplifya gene. This ORF (SAR2008 of the MRSA252 genome, herein 1.9kbproductthatspansthestartcodonofnosandstopcodonof referred to as pdt) encodes a predicted prephenate dehydratase pdt. As shown in Fig.3A, a distinct 1.9 kb PCR product was (saPDT)enzyme,whichcatalyzestheformationofphenylpyruvate amplified using cDNA as template, confirming that nos and pdt from prephenate during phenylalanine biosynthesis [23]. A areindeedco-transcribed.Thisamplificationonlyoccurredwhen conserveddomainsearch[37]oftheS.aureuspdtORFrevealed reverse-transcriptase (RT) enzyme was present in the cDNA the presence of signature catalytic (PDT; IPR001086) and synthesis reaction, indicating that this product was not amplified regulatory(ACT;IPR002912)domainspresentinmono-function- fromcontaminatinggenomicDNA.Becausethenosmutantused alPDTenzymesthatarecommontoGram-positivebacteria[23]. in this study was created by inserting an erythromycin resistance A BLAST search [38] using the S. aureus MRSA252 nucleotide gene cassette into the nos coding sequence, the effect on pdt sequence spanning the nos and pdt ORFs revealed that this transcription in this mutant was also assessed using quantitative organizationispresentinallsequencedS.aureusgenomes,aswell real-timePCR(Fig.3B).Comparisonofpdtexpressioninthenos as all sequenced coagulase-negative staphylococcal genomes mutantbythismethodrevealedthatpdtRNAlevelswereabout3currently available in the National Center for Biotechnology fold less than the wild-type strain in low-oxygen 6 hour cultures, Information (NCBI) genome database (Fig.1). As reported and pdt expression was not restored when the nos mutant was previously [3] and verified by our own BLAST search of all complemented with nos expression from a plasmid. These results sequenced microbial genomes in the NCBI database, numerous collectivelydemonstratethatthenosandpdtgenesrepresentacootherbacterialgenomescontainageneencodingapredictedNO- transcribed operon, and that the insertion mutagenesis used to synthase that ishighlyhomologous tothe S. aureus nos ORF(. createthenosmutanthasa partialpolareffecton pdtexpression whencultured in TSB. 50% amino acid identity). However, inspection of the genomic context of nos in these other bacteria revealed that the putative nos-pdtoperonstructureappearstobeuniquetothestaphylococci S. aureus PDT is required for growth in the absence of (Fig.1). phenylalanine but does not affect oxidative stress Togaininsightintothegrowthconditionsunderwhichnosand resistance and carotenoid pigmentation pdt are expressed, quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR) was ThecrystalstructureofsaPDThasbeenpreviouslysolvedand performedonRNAisolatedfromaerobicandlow-oxygencultures the predicted enzymatic function of this enzyme (conversion of at early-exponential (2hours growth), late exponential (6 hours phenylpyruvate to prephenate) has been confirmed in vitro [23]. growth) and stationary (12 hours growth) growth phase (Fig.2). However, the operon structure of nos and pdt suggest that the Theexpressionpatternsofnosandpdtweresimilar,inthatRNA functions of each encoded enzyme may be inter-related. Therelevels of each gene were greatly increased under low-oxygen fore, the ability of wild-type, nos mutant, pdt mutant, and Figure1.GeneticarrangementoftheS.aureusnosandpdtgenes.Therepresentativebacterialgeneraand/orspeciesthatcontainanosgene arelistedbelowtheS.aureusnos-pdtoperondiagram.The‘‘+’’designationundernosindicatesitspresenceineachrespectivegenome,whereasthe ‘‘+/2’’ designation under pdt indicates if this gene is located immediately downstream of nos in each respective bacterial genera/species. The predictedmolecularweight(kDa)ofthenosandpdtORFsareindicatedaboveeachgene,andthesize(bp)ofeachgeneisshownbelow.Gene designations refer to the MRSA252 genome. The site where the erm resistance cassette was inserted to create the nos::erm mutant (KR1010) is indicatedbytheblackblockarrow.*denotesthatallsequencedstrainsinNCBIcontaintheindicatedgenes. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0108868.g001 PLOSONE | www.plosone.org 6 October2014 | Volume 9 | Issue 10 | e108868 <BLANKLINE> --- PAGE 7 --- <BLANKLINE> Staphylococcusaureusnos-pdtOperon Figure3.Co-transcriptionofnosandpdtgenes.A: 0.750mgof UAMS-1RNAisolatedfrom6-hourlow-oxygencultureswasconverted tocDNAusingtheiScriptselectcDNAkit(BioRad)andprimerpdt5-R. Figure 2. Growth-phase dependent nos (A) and pdt (B) As a control, these reactions were also performed in the absence of expression.TotalRNAwasisolatedattheindicatedtimepointsfrom reverse-transcriptase(RT)enzyme,tocheckforgenomicDNAcontamn=3biologicalreplicatesofUAMS-1grownunderhighlyaerated(light ination of the RNA. Equal amounts of RT+ and RT- cDNA samples, as greybars;250RPM,1:10volume-to-flaskratio)orlow-oxygen(darkgrey wellasUAMS-1genomicDNAandnotemplatecontrol,wereusedas bars; 0 RPM, 7:10 volume-to-flask ratio) conditions. Quantitative real- templatesinaPCRreactioncontainingtheprimerpairnos5-F/pdt5-R, time PCR was performed on reverse-transcribed cDNA from each whichamplifiesaproductspanningtheregionbetweenthenosstart sample using nos (A) or pdt (B) specific primers. The Livak (2-DDCt) codonandpdtstopcodon.Dataarerepresentativeofresultsobtained method was used to determine relative fold change of nos and pdt from RNA isolated from n=3 biological replicates. B: Total RNA was expression,usingmeasuredsigAexpressionasthereferencegeneand isolated from n=3 biological replicates each of UAMS-1 (pMK4; wildthe2houraerobicsampleasthecalibrator.Errorbars = standarderror type), KR1010 (pMK4; nos mutant), and KR1010 (pMKnos; nos of the mean (SEM). *denotes statistical significance between aerobic complement) grown at 37uC for 6hours under low-oxygen (0 RPM, andlow-oxygenfold-changevaluesateachindicatedtimepoint(Two- 7:10 volume-to-flask ratio) conditions. Quantitative real-time PCR was TailedT-Test,p,0.01);Ndenotesstatisticalsignificancerelativetot=2 performed on reverse-transcribed cDNA from each sample using nos hourlow-oxygentimepoint(Dunnett’sTest,p,0.05). and pdt-specific primers. The Livak (2-DDCt) method was used to doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0108868.g002 determine relative fold change of expression of each gene, using measuredsigAexpressionasthereferencegeneandthe2houraerobic corresponding complement strains to grow in the presence and sample as the calibrator. Error bars = SEM. *denotes statistical significanceofnosexpressionrelativeUAMS-1(Student-Newman-Keuls absence of phenylalanine was compared using a chemicallyTest,p,0.05);Ndenotesstatisticalsignificanceofpdtexpressionrelative defined media (CDM; Fig.4). In complete CDM (containing UAMS-1(Student-Newman-KeulsTest,p,0.05). phenylalanine), all wild-type, mutant, and complement strains doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0108868.g003 displayedsimilargrowthpatternsovera24-hourperiod,andeach achieved a similar OD after 24hours growth (Fig.4A). (Fig.3B). Data retrieved from a previously-published RNA-seq 600 However, in CDM lacking phenylalanine, the pdt mutant experiment performed on S. aureus strain USA300 HOU [39] displayed greatly reduced growth relative to the wild-type strain, suggests that there may be other potential promoter sites within andreachedanOD thatwas83%lessthanthewild-typestrain the nos-pdt operon capable of driving pdt expression (Fig. S1 in 600 File S1). At least two of these regions are located downstream of after 24hours (Fig.4B). This growth defect was fully complementedbyexpressingthepdtgeneintransonaplasmidinthepdt the inserted erm cassette in the nos mutant, and may represent a potentialreasonwhygrowthintheabsenceofphenylalaninewas mutant strain, confirming a requirement for this enzyme in S. notimpairedinthenosmutant.Overalltheseresultssuggestthat aureus phenylalanine biosynthesis. The pattern of nos mutant (1) saNOS is not required for growth in the absence of growthwasnearlyidenticaltothewild-typestrainintheabsence phenylalanine, and (2) there is adequate expression of pdt in the of phenylalanine (Fig. 4C), even though this mutation had a nos mutant tosupport phenylalanine biosynthesis whengrown in partial polar effect on pdt expression when grown in TSB chemically-defined media. PLOSONE | www.plosone.org 7 October2014 | Volume 9 | Issue 10 | e108868 <BLANKLINE> --- PAGE 8 --- <BLANKLINE> Staphylococcusaureusnos-pdtOperon Figure4.Effectsofnosandpdtongrowthinchemically-definedmedia.UAMS-1(pMK4;wild-type),KR1010(pMK4;nosmutant),KR1010 (pMKnos;noscomplement),KR1013(pMK4;pdtmutant),andKR1013(pMKpdt;pdtcomplement)weregrowninchemically-definedmediainthe presence(A)orabsence(BandC)ofphenylalanine.CultureswereinoculatedtoanOD =0.02,andgrownstaticallyina96-wellplatefor24hours 600 at37uC.OD 600 readingsweremeasuredevery2hoursusingamicroplatereader.Datarepresentstheaverageofn=4biologicalreplicatesacquiredin 2independentexperiments.Errorbars = SEM.*statisticalsignificanceofpdtmutant(pMK4)OD comparedtoUAMS-1(pMK4)att=24hours 600 growth(p,0.05,TukeyTest). doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0108868.g004 A role for saNOS in resistance to oxidative stress has been methanol-extractedcarotenoidpigmentsfrom48-hourTSAplate established[18,20,21],butasimilarroleforsaPDT hasnotbeen cultures of wild-type, nos mutant, and complement strains previously explored. Given that nos [40] and pdt [40,41] (Fig.6A).Consistentwithqualitativeobservations,thenosmutant expression were shown by others to be induced in response to displayed a statistically-significant (p,0.05, Student-NewmanH O , it is possible that saPDT may also contribute to oxidative Keuls Test) increase in pigmentation compared to the wild-type 2 2 stress resistance, possibly by generating the a-keto acid anion strain. Furthermore, pigment was restored to wild-type levels by phenylpyruvatethathasbeenproposedtoactasanantioxidantby complementation with a nos-expressing plasmid but not with a direct chemical interaction with H O [42]. To explore this pdt-expressing plasmid, verifying that increased pigmentation of 2 2 possibility, wild-type, nos mutant, pdtmutant, and corresponding the nos mutant is solely due to loss of saNOS function. To complement cultures were grown to late-exponential phase, and determineifincreasedpigmentationinthenosmutantwasaresult challenged with 250mM H O (Fig.5). As expected, the nos of altered expression of pigment-related genes, qPCR was 2 2 mutant displayed a significant (.3-log) reduction in cell viability employed to measure changes in expression of crtN (a member after H 2 O 2 challenge compared to the wild-type strain, and this ofthecarotenoidbiosynthesisoperon[43]),asp23(alkalineshock phenotype was fully-restored by supplying the nos gene on a protein23,highly-regulatedbyalternativesigmafactorB[44,45]), plasmid (Fig.5A). However, the sensitivity of the pdt mutant to andpurH(purinebiosynthesisgeneH),asmutationinthesegenes oxidative stress was unaffected in this assay (Fig.5B), suggesting and/or regulatory circuits have each been shown to greatly alter that, at least in this in vitro growth condition, saPDT does not pigment production [43,45,46]. Surprisingly, asp23, crtN, and appear tofunctioninan antioxidantcapacity. purH RNA levels were not significantly different between wildDuring routine culturing of the wild-type, nos mutant, pdt type,nosmutant,andnoscomplementstrains(Fig.6B),suggesting mutant, and complement strains used in these studies, the nos thatincreasedpigmentationofthenosmutantisnotduetoaltered mutant consistently appeared to display increased carotenoid expression of these genes. (golden-yellow) pigmentation when cultured on TSA agar plates. This observation was verified by measuring the A of 465nm PLOSONE | www.plosone.org 8 October2014 | Volume 9 | Issue 10 | e108868 <BLANKLINE> --- PAGE 9 --- <BLANKLINE> Staphylococcusaureusnos-pdtOperon Figure 6. Effect of S. aureusnos mutation on carotenoid pigmentation. A: UAMS-1 (pMK4; wild-type), KR1010 (pMK4; nos mutant),KR1010(pMKnos;noscomplement),andKR1010(pMKpdt;nos Figure5.Effectofnosandpdtonoxidativestressresistance.A: mutantcontainingpdtcomplementplasmid)weregrownfor48hours UAMS-1 (pMK4; wild-type), KR1010 (pMK4; nos mutant) and KR1010 at37uConTSAplates.Pigmentsfromeachculturewereextractedwith (pMKnos;noscomplement)wereculturedaerobicallyfor4.75–5hours methanol,theA ofeachsamplewasmeasured,andstandardized 465nm (mid-exponential growth phase) in LB media (‘‘pre-treatment’’ time by dividing by the sample’s corresponding relative OD value 600 point,lightgreybars)priortoadditionof250mMHO .Cultureswere (measured prior to methanol extraction step). Results represent the 2 2 thengrownfor2morehourstoassesstheeffectofH O treatmentcell average of n=3 independent experiments, error bars = SEM. 2 2 viabilitybyCFUplating(‘‘post-treatment’’timepoint,darkgreybars).B: *statistical significance compared to UAMS-1 (pMK4) (p,0.05, StuUAMS-1 (pMK4; wild-type), KR1013 (pMK4; pdt mutant), and KR1013 dent-Newman-KeulsTest).B:TotalRNAfrom28hourTSAplatecultures (pMKpdt; pdt complement) were analyzed for resistance to 250mM ofUAMS-1(pMK4),nos::ermmutant(pMK4),noscomplementandpdt H O as described in panel A. All data representthe average of n=5 complement strains (n=3 biological replicates each) was reversed2 2 independent experiments. Error bars = SEM. *statistical significance transcribedtocDNA,andsubjectedtoquantitativereal-timePCRusing comparedtoUAMS-1(pMK4)(p,0.05,Student-Newman-KeulsTest). primersspecificfordetectingnos,pdt,asp23,crtN,andpurHexpression. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0108868.g005 TheLivak(2-DDCt)methodwasusedtodeterminerelativefoldchange expression of each gene, using measured sigA expression as the referencegeneandtheUAMS-1(pMK4)sampleasthecalibrator. DetectionofintracellularNO/RNSinS.aureusbyDAF-FM doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0108868.g006 diacetate TodetectandcomparerelativelevelsofintracellularNOinS. aureus cells, whereas treatment with DEA alone did not affect aureus, an assay using the cell-permeable fluorescent stain DAFfluorescence relative to the untreated condition. Interestingly, FM diacetate was developed. This compound diffuses into cells treatmentofcellswithcPTIOalonedecreasedintracellularDAFand once inside, is cleaved by intracellular esterases to liberate FM fluorescence relative to untreated cells (buffer alone), weakly-fluorescent DAF-FM, which in turn becomes highly suggesting that this NO scavenger was able to reduce the level fluorescent upon reaction with NO or other specific RNS [47]. ofendogenousNOdetectablebyintracellularDAF-FM.FurtherTo validate the use of this stain as an indirect indicator of more, when cPTIO-treated cells were subsequently exposed to intracellular NO levels inS. aureus,wild-type biofilms grownfor NO donor, the fluorescent signal did not greatly increase 7 hoursweresubjectedtoDAF-FMdiacetatestaining,followedby compared to the untreated sample. Collectively, these results treatmentwithHBSSbufferalone,DEA/NO(ashorthalf-lifeNO validate the use of DAF-FM diacetate as a fluorescent tool to donor),DEAalone,cPTIO(anNOscavenger),andDEA/NO + indirectly measure intracellular NO levels inS. aureus. cPTIO (Figure7A). As expected, treatment with DEA/NO DAF-FM diaceate was initially used to measure relative resulted in a marked increase in DAF-FM fluorescence in S. endogenous NO levels in late-exponential phase low-oxygen PLOSONE | www.plosone.org 9 October2014 | Volume 9 | Issue 10 | e108868 <BLANKLINE> --- PAGE 10 --- <BLANKLINE> Staphylococcusaureusnos-pdtOperon observed when these strains were cultured on TSA plates (Fig.6A), 28-hour TSA plate cultures of wild-type, nos mutant, and complement strains were also assessed for endogenous NO levels by staining with DAF-FM diacetate (Fig.7B). Intriguingly, DAF-FM fluorescence was significantly (p,0.05, Tukey test) decreased relative to the wild-type and complement strains, suggesting that saNOS enzyme activity and/or expression is increased in S. aureus when cultured on TSA plates. Given that thelevelofDAF-FMfluorescenceonlydecreasedbyabout35%in thenosmutant,itislikelythatothercellularsourcesofendogenous NOand/orRNSarealsopresentthatareabletoreactwithDAFFM inthisassay. Contribution of saNOS to survival in a murine sepsis model Although the contribution of saNOS to MRSA virulence has been previously-demonstrated in a murine abscess model of infection[21],aroleforthisenzymeinvirulenceofMSSAhasnot beenreported.Therefore,thevirulenceofMSSAstrainUAMS-1 and its isogenic nos mutant was compared using a previouslypublished murine sepsis model of infection [35,36]. As demonstratedinFigs. 8A–8D,thebacterialload(asmeasuredbyCFU/ organ)inthelungs,kidneys,andliverweresignificantly(p,0.05, Mann-Whitney Test) lower in the nos mutant-infected mice compared to wild-type infected mice. Although not a statistically significant difference, bacterial counts from the heart were also decreased in nos mutant-infected mice relative to the wild-type infected mice. As well, the nos mutant-infected mice displayed significantly (p,0.05, Log Rank and Chi Squared Test with 1degreeoffreedom)lessmortalitythanthewild-typeinfectedmice inthismodelofinfection,with8/9nosmutant-infectedmiceand 6/9 wild-type-infected mice surviving throughout the 7-day infection (Fig.8E). Given that a partial polar effect on pdt expression was observed in the nos mutant when grown in lowoxygenTSBcultures(Fig.3B),itispossiblethattheinvivoeffects Figure 7. Detection of intracellular NO/RNS with DAF-FM diacetate. A: Cells harvested from replicate UAMS-1 7 hour static ofthenosmutantobservedinthisstudyaredue,inpart,topartial biofilmswereresuspendedinHBSScontaining5mMDAF-FMdiacetate. loss of pdt expression. These results, combined with previouslyAfter incubation for 1 hour at 37uC, cells were collected by published data showing that a MRSA nos deletion mutant centrifugation, washed,and resuspended in HBSS alone (‘‘untreated’’) displayed decreased virulence in an abscess infection model [21], or HBSS supplemented with 100mM DEA or 100mM DEA/NO. Where suggest that saNOS and/or saPDT contribute to S. aureus indicated,150mMcPTIO(NOscavenger)wasaddedtocellsuspensions duringthe1hourDAF-FMdiacetatestainingstep.Aliquots(200ml)of dissemination andsurvival invivo. each cellsuspension were immediately transferredto a 96-wellplate, and incubated at 37uC in a Synergy HT fluorescent plate reader. Discussion Fluorescence and OD measurements were recorded after 30min600 utes, and data were reported as relative fluorescent units (RFU) per Anemergingbodyofevidencehasdemonstratedthatbacterial OD 600 ofeachwell.Datarepresentstheaverageofn=3independent NOS enzymes act as important regulators of cellular stress experiments, error bars = SEM. *statistical significance compared to resistance and physiology. For example, NO-derived from the untreatedUAMS-1(p,0.05,TukeyTest).B:UAMS-1(pMK4;wild-type), NOS of plant-pathogenic Streptomyces species is required for the KR1010 (pMK4; nos mutant), and KR1010 (pMKnos; nos complement) were grown on agar plates for 26hours, followed by harvesting and nitrationofthaxtominphytotoxins,amodificationthatisessential resuspensioninHBSS+5mMDAF-FMdicaetate.Fluorescence(RFU)and for its phytotoxicity [12]. The NOS enzymes of B. subtilis, B. OD 600 readings were recorded after 90minutes incubation in a anthracis, and S. aureus have also been shown to promote microplatereaderasdescribedabove.Datarepresentstheaverageof resistance to oxidative stress imposed by hydrogen peroxide n=3 independent experiments, error bars = SEM. *statistical signifi- [14,15,21]andbycertainantibiotics[18,21].Thisoxidativestress cancecomparedtoUAMS-1(pMK4)(p,0.05,TukeyTest). resistance has been proposed to be mediated by several doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0108868.g007 mechanisms, including transient suppression of the enzymatic reduction of intracellular cysteines by NO (and subsequent TSB cultures of the wild-type, nos mutant, and complement inhibition of the Fenton reaction) [14,15], NO activation of strains,asnosexpressionwasincreasedatthisphaseoflow-oxygen catalase activity [14,15], and NO-induced expression and/or growth (Fig.2). However, no detectable differences in DAF-FM increased activity of superoxide dismutase (SOD) [18,21]. Our fluorescence were observed (Fig. S2 in File S1), suggesting that current results have corroborated the contribution of saNOS to saNOSactivitymaybeminimalorverytransientatthisphaseof hydrogen peroxide resistance in the MSSA strain UAMS-1, and growth. Alternatively, its contribution to endogenous NO in this furthermore, have alsoillustrated that carotenoid pigmentationis growthconditionmaybemaskedrelativetoothercellularsources increasedinanosmutantwhengrownonTSAplates(Fig. 6A),a of NO/RNS. Since phenotypic changes in pigmentation were phenotypethathasnotbeenpreviouslydescribedforS.aureusnos PLOSONE | www.plosone.org 10 October2014 | Volume 9 | Issue 10 | e108868 <BLANKLINE> --- PAGE 11 --- <BLANKLINE> Staphylococcusaureusnos-pdtOperon Figure8.EffectofnosonS.aureusvirulence.16108CFU/mlofUAMS-1(wild-type)andKR1010(nosmutant)cultureswereeachinjectedinto thetailveinsoffemaleCD-1Swissmice(n=9micepergroup).Theinfectionproceededfor7days,oruntilmicereachedapre-moribundstate(used asameasureofmortality).Miceweretheneuthanizedandorganswerecollectedandstoredat280uCpriortohomogenizationanddeterminationof recoveredCFU/organ.Graphsrepresentthecalculatedbacterialburdensforthekidneys(A),heart(B),lungs(C)andliver(D),andthepercentsurvival (E).ForA–D,dataaregraphedasbox-whiskerplots,indicatingthe25th,median,and75thpercentiles(boxlines),the90thand10thpercentiles(error bars),andmean(+)ofeachdata-set.*denotesstatisticallysignificantdifferenceofmortality(p,0.05,LogRankandChiSquaredTestwith1-degreeof freedom),**denotesstatisticalsignificanceofbacterialrecovery(p,0.05,Mann-WhitneyTest). doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0108868.g008 mutants. Staphyloxanthin, the major carotenoid pigment synthe- observed, since maximal expression of crtM has been shown to sized by a series of enzymes encoded by the crt operon [43], has occurinstationaryphaseinplanktonicculture[46].Althoughloss been shown to be a potent antioxidant defense against hydrogen ofsaNOSdoesnotappeartoalterexpressionofthecrtoperonand peroxideandtheimmunecellrespiratoryburst[48,49],aswellas regulatorsofcrtexpressionwhengrownonTSAplates(Fig.6B),it conferring tolerance to host antimicrobial peptides [50] and fatty ispossiblethatNOderivedfromsaNOSmayregulatetheactivity acids[51]byalteringmembranefluidity.Therefore,atfirstglance, of one or more of the enzymes involved in the synthesis of itappearsparadoxicalthataS.aureusnosmutantwouldbemore staphyloxanthinoroneofitsprecursors.Anotherpossibilitystems sensitive to oxidative stress while displaying increased carotenoid fromthefactthatthedegreeofconjugation(increasednumberof pigmentation. However, the hydrogen peroxide challenge assay double bonds) in carotenoids tends to correlate to the observed utilized in this study was performed during mid-exponential intensityoforange-yellowpigmentation[52].SinceNOisknown growth phase in planktonic cultures, a growth condition under to have an affinity for biological membranes [53] and can attack which differences in staphyloxanthin production is unlikely to be the double bonds of b-carotene [54], it is possible that increased PLOSONE | www.plosone.org 11 October2014 | Volume 9 | Issue 10 | e108868 <BLANKLINE> --- PAGE 12 --- <BLANKLINE> Staphylococcusaureusnos-pdtOperon pigmentation observed in the S. aureus nos mutant is simply a resistance in S. aureus, we have demonstrated that expression of result of lossofNO accumulation inthecellmembrane. nos-pdt is upregulated in response to low-oxygen growth and is In these presented studies, we have also optimized the use of maximally expressed at late-exponential growth phase. These DAF-FMdiacetatetomonitorrelativeintracellularNOlevelsinS. observations suggest that one or both of these enzymes are aureus.Usingthistechnique,adecreaseinintracellularNO/RNS requiredforanas-yetunknownfunctioninthenormalphysiology wasobservedintheS.aureusnosmutantwhenculturedonTSA ofthisorganismduringlow-oxygengrowth.Althoughthegenetic plates,agrowthconditionwhereincreasedpigmentationofthenos regulators of nos-pdt expression have not yet been identified, a mutantwasalsoobserved.AlthoughDAF-FMcanalsoreactwith searchoftheS.aureusmicroarraymeta-database(SAMMD)[60] certain RNS such as nitrosonium ions, the majority of the has revealed that nos expression was upregulated in purH [46], fluorescent signal has been shown by others to be due to NO lytS [61], and clpP [62] mutants, as well as by challenge with [55,56].SincetheNOradicalitselfisrelativelyunstableandmay H O [40],anddownregulatedwhenchallengedwithchlorination 2 2 quickly yield other RNS upon exposure to cellular components, [63],mupirocin [64],andvarious antimicrobial peptides[65]. intracellular DAF-FM fluorescence should be considered an The S. aureus PDT enzyme has also been postulated to be a indirect measurement of NO levels. In previous studies of S. potentialdrugtargetsinceitisinvolvedinphenylalaninesynthesis aureus[21],B.anthracis[14],andB.subtilis[57]NOSactivity,a andishighlyconservedamongthestaphylococci[23].Assuch,the NO-specificcopperfluorescein(CuFL)stain[58,59]wasutilizedto enzymatic activity of purified recombinant S. aureus PDT has detectintracellularNOproductioninwild-typeandnosmutants. been demonstrated and the crystal structure of this protein has When used in S. aureus, the cells were incubated in a buffer beensolved[23].AlthoughstudyofthisgeneinS.aureushasnot containing arginine prior to CuFL staining [21] and it was not been previously described, the data presented in this manuscript specified in this study whether excess arginine was necessary to begintofulfillthisknowledgegapbyconfirmingaroleforsaPDT detect NO production. Arginine addition may artificially induce as being required for growth in the absence of phenylalanine, as nos expression and/or enzyme activity in cells not normally well as identifying low-oxygen growth as a signal that stimulates producing nos, and may overestimate the actual number of cells expression of pdt in vitro. RNA microarray analysis of S. aureus that contain high-level saNOS enzyme activity when growing in culturespreviouslyrevealedthatnosandpdtwereupregulated2.5vivo. Furthermore, CuFL specifically interacts with NO to yield and 2.2-fold, respectively, in H O -treated cultures [40]. Given 2 2 high-level fluorescence, but it may be more difficult to detect thesecollectiveresults,wehypothesizedthatsaPDT,likesaNOS, endogenousNOifitisproducedinashortbiologicalwindoworif may also contribute to oxidative stress resistance, possibly by itreactsquicklywithothercellulartargetstoyieldotherRNS.In generating excess phenylpyruvate under these conditions. The athese cases the use of DAF-FM diacetate may provide a viable keto acid anions, such as b-hydroxypyruvate and b-phenylpyrualternative method ofintracellular fluorescent NO detection. vate,canchemicallyreactwithH O ,andhavebeenproposedto 2 2 The protective effects of endogenous NO observed in bacteria act as antioxidants by nucleophilic attack of the mono-deprotoinvitrolikelytranslatetoanimportantcontributionofNOStothe nated peroxide species at the C-2 carbonyl group carbon center virulence of these Gram-positive pathogens during human [42]. Furthermore, pyruvate, another a-keto acid, is commonly infection. For example, a B. anthracis nos mutant displayed addedasanH 0 -scavengerincertaincellculturemedia[66],and decreased survival when engulfed by macrophages, and an 2 2 exogenous pyruvate is able to protect these cultured cells from increased lethal dose (LD ) of spores compared to the parental 50 H O -inducedlysis[67].However,ourdatasuggeststhatsaNOS straininamurinemodelofsystemicinfection[14].Furthermore,a 2 2 is not required for activity of saPDT when participating in nos mutant generated in a highly virulent community-acquired phenylalanine biosynthesis, and saPDT itself does not appear to MRSA(USA300)strainwasshowntobemoresensitivetokilling contribute to hydrogen peroxide resistance under the in vitro byneutrophilsbybothintracellularandextracellularmechanisms, conditions tested in this study (Figs. 4 and 5). Therefore the aswellasdecreasedsurvivalinmacrophages[21].ThisMRSAnos potential functional and/or biological relationship between these mutant was also less virulent in a murine subcutaneous model of two enzymes remains a mystery and subject of our on-going infection, displaying decreased abscess sizes and decreased investigations. recovered CFUs compared to the wild-type strain [21]. The UAMS-1nos::ermmutantstrainusedinourcurrentstudywasalso Supporting Information less virulent than its wild-type counterpart in a murine sepsis modelofinfection(Fig.8).Apartialpolareffectonpdtexpression File S1 Contains the following files: Figure S1. Expression of was observed in this mutant when grown in low-oxygen TSB the nos-pdt operon in S. aureus USA300 HOU as assessed by cultures (Fig.3B), therefore it is possible that the in vivo effects RNA-seq analysis. Data depicted in this figure was generated as observedinthesepsismodelweredue,inpart,topartiallossofpdt partofapreviously-publishedRNA-seqstudy[39],wherebyRNA expression.GiventheinterestinbothNOSandPDTaspotential from3hourTSBculturesofstrainUSA300HOUwassubjected drugdevelopmenttargets[22,23],ourfuturestudieswillfocuson toIonTorrentsequencingandresultingreadswerealignedtothe assessing the individual contributions of nos and pdt to S. aureus USA300 FPR genome. Arrows represent potential internal virulence in vivousing non-polardeletion mutants. promoters and/or RNA processing sites. Figure S2. Detection As discussed above, S. aureus NOS clearly contributes to the of intracellular NO/RNS in low-oxygen cultures. UAMS-1 oxidative stress response and virulence of this deadly pathogen. (pMK4), KR1010 (nos::erm mutant; pMK4), and KR1010 Consideringtheinterestinthisenzymeasapotentialdrugtarget, (complement; pMKnos) were grown as low-oxygen TSB cultures studies aimed at understanding the upstream regulators of both for6.25 hours,followedbyharvestingandresuspensioninHBSS nos gene expression and saNOS enzyme activity are surprisingly +5 mMDAF-FMdicaetateasdescribedinMaterialsandMethods. lacking[22].Inthestudypresentedhere,wehaveconfirmedthat Fluorescence (RFU) and OD readings were recorded after S. aureus nos is co-transcribed with the downstream pdt gene, 600 90minutesincubationinamicroplatereader.Datarepresentsthe encodingaprephenatedehydratasewhichcatalyzestheformation average ofn=3 independent experiments, error bars = SEM. of phenylpyruvate from prephenate in the phenylalanine biosyn- (PDF) thesis pathway. Although saNOS contributes to oxidative stress PLOSONE | www.plosone.org 12 October2014 | Volume 9 | Issue 10 | e108868 <BLANKLINE> --- PAGE 13 --- <BLANKLINE> Staphylococcusaureusnos-pdtOperon Acknowledgments Author Contributions The authors gratefully acknowledge Ms. Cydney Godman for technical Conceived and designed the experiments: KCR AMS EAA ABM LNS. assistance. Performedthe experiments:AMSEAAABM FRARRKCR.Analyzed thedata:AMSABMFRLNSKCR.Wrotethepaper:KCRAMSABM EAALNSARR. References 1. LancasterJRJr.(1997)Atutorialonthediffusibilityandreactivityoffreenitric 30. PattonTG,RiceKC,FosterMK,BaylesKW(2005)TheStaphylococcusaureus oxide.NitricOxide1:18–30. cidCgeneencodesapyruvateoxidasethataffectsacetatemetabolismandcell 2. Toledo JC Jr, Augusto O (2012) Connecting the chemical and biological deathinstationaryphase.MolMicrobiol56:1664–1674. propertiesofnitricoxide.ChemResToxicol25:975–989. 31. LivakKJ,SchmittgenTD(2001)Analysisofrelativegeneexpressiondatausing 3. SudhamsuJ,CraneBR(2009)Bacterialnitricoxidesynthases:whatarethey real-timequantitativePCRandthe2(-DeltaDeltaC(T))Method.Methods25: goodfor?TrendsMicrobiol17:212–218. 402–408. 4. CraneBR,SudhamsuJ,PatelBA(2010)Bacterialnitricoxidesynthases.Annu 32. MorikawaK,MaruyamaA,InoseY,HigashideM,HayashiH,etal.(2001) RevBiochem79:445–470. Overexpressionofsigmafactor,sigma(B),urgesStaphylococcusaureustothicken 5. Forstermann U, Sessa WC (2012) Nitric oxide synthases: regulation and thecellwallandtoresistbeta-lactams.BiochemBiophysResCommun288: function.EurHeartJ33:829–837,837a–837d. 385–389. 6. CrawfordNM(2006)Mechanismsfornitricoxidesynthesisinplants.JExpBot 33. Lincoln RA, Leigh JA, Jones NC (1995) The amino acid requirements of 57:471–478. Staphylococcusaureusisolatedfromcasesofbovinemastitis.VetMicrobiol45: 7. Alderton WK, Cooper CE, Knowles RG (2001) Nitric oxide synthases: 275–279. structure,functionandinhibition.BiochemJ357:593–615. 34. JettBD, HatterKL,HuyckeMM,Gilmore MS(1997)Simplified agarplate 8. YunHY,DawsonVL,DawsonTM(1996)Neurobiologyofnitricoxide.Crit methodforquantifyingviablebacteria.Biotechniques23:648–650. RevNeurobiol10:291–316. 35. VoyichJM,OttoM,MathemaB,BraughtonKR,WhitneyAR,etal.(2006)Is 9. LiptonSA(2001)Physiology.Nitricoxideandrespiration.Nature.England.pp. Panton-Valentine leukocidin the major virulence determinant in community118–119,121. associatedmethicillin-resistantStaphylococcusaureusdisease?JInfectDis194: 10. MalinskiT,TahaZ(1992)Nitricoxidereleasefromasinglecellmeasuredin 1761–1770. situbyaporphyrinic-basedmicrosensor.Nature358:676–678. 36. Kolar SL, Ibarra JA, Rivera FE, Mootz JM, Davenport JE, et al. (2013) 11. WinkDA,GrishamMB,MitchellJB,FordPC(1996)Directandindirecteffects ExtracellularproteasesarekeymediatorsofStaphylococcusaureusvirulencevia ofnitricoxideinchemicalreactionsrelevanttobiology.MethodsEnzymol268: theglobalmodulationofvirulence-determinantstability.Microbiologyopen2: 12–31. 18–34. 12. KersJA,WachMJ,KrasnoffSB,WidomJ,CameronKD,etal.(2004)Nitration 37. HunterS,JonesP,MitchellA,ApweilerR,AttwoodTK,etal.(2012)InterPro ofapeptidephytotoxinbybacterialnitricoxidesynthase.Nature429:79–82. in 2011: new developments in the family and domain prediction database. 13. Wach MJ, Kers JA, Krasnoff SB, Loria R, Gibson DM (2005) Nitric oxide NucleicAcidsRes40:D306–312. synthase inhibitors and nitric oxide donors modulate the biosynthesis of 38. Altschul SF, Gish W, Miller W, Myers EW, Lipman DJ (1990) Basic local thaxtominA,anitratedphytotoxinproducedbyStreptomycesspp.NitricOxide alignmentsearchtool.JMolBiol215:403–410. 12:46–53. 39. WeissA,IbarraJA,PaolettiJ,CarrollRK,ShawLN(2014)Thedeltasubunitof 14. ShatalinK,GusarovI,AvetissovaE,ShatalinaY,McQuadeLE,etal.(2008) RNA polymerase guides promoter selectivity and virulence in Staphylococcus Bacillusanthracis-derivednitricoxideisessentialforpathogenvirulenceand aureus.InfectImmun82:1424–1435. survivalinmacrophages.ProcNatlAcadSciUSA105:1009–1013. 40. Chang W, Small DA, Toghrol F, Bentley WE (2006) Global transcriptome 15. GusarovI,NudlerE(2005)NO-mediatedcytoprotection:instantadaptationto analysis of Staphylococcus aureus response to hydrogen peroxide. JBacteriol oxidativestressinbacteria.ProcNatlAcadSciUSA102:13855–13860. 188:1648–1659. 16. LiuP, HuangQ,Chen W(2012)Heterologousexpressionofbacterialnitric 41. Palazzolo-BallanceAM,ReniereML,BraughtonKR,SturdevantDE,OttoM, oxide synthase gene: a potential biological method to control biofilm et al. (2008) Neutrophil microbicides induce a pathogen survival response in developmentintheenvironment.CanJMicrobiol58:336–344. community-associated methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus. JImmunol 17. Schreiber F, Beutler M, Enning D, Lamprecht-Grandio M, Zafra O, et al. 180:500–509. (2011) The role of nitric-oxide-synthase-derived nitric oxide in multicellular 42. Perera A, Parkes HG, Herz H, Haycock P, Blake DR, et al. (1997) High traitsofBacillussubtilis3610:biofilmformation,swarming,anddispersal.BMC resolution1HNMRinvestigationsofthereactivitiesofalpha-ketoacidanions Microbiol11:111. withhydrogenperoxide.FreeRadicRes26:145–157. 18. GusarovI,ShatalinK,StarodubtsevaM,NudlerE(2009)Endogenousnitric 43. WielandB,FeilC,Gloria-MaerckerE,ThummG,LechnerM,etal.(1994) oxide protects bacteria against a wide spectrum of antibiotics. Science 325: Geneticandbiochemicalanalysesofthebiosynthesisoftheyellowcarotenoid 1380–1384. 4,4’-diaponeurosporeneofStaphylococcusaureus.JBacteriol176:7719–7726. 19. CentersforDiseaseControl(2013)AntibioticResistanceThreatsintheUnited 44. GertzS,EngelmannS,SchmidR,OhlsenK,HackerJ,etal.(1999)Regulation States. of sigmaB-dependent transcription of sigB and asp23 in two different 20. VaishM,SinghVK(2013)AntioxidantFunctionsofNitricOxideSynthaseina Staphylococcusaureusstrains.MolGenGenet261:558–566. MethicillinSensitiveStaphylococcusaureus.IntJMicrobiol2013:312146. 21. vanSorgeNM,BeasleyFC,GusarovI,GonzalezDJ,vonKockritz-Blickwede 45. Giachino P, Engelmann S, Bischoff M (2001) Sigma(B) activity depends on M,etal.(2013)Methicillin-resistantStaphylococcusaureusbacterialnitric-oxide RsbUinStaphylococcusaureus.JBacteriol183:1843–1852. synthaseaffectsantibioticsensitivityandskinabscessdevelopment.JBiolChem 46. Lan L, Cheng A, Dunman PM, Missiakas D, He C (2010) Golden pigment 288:6417–6426. production and virulence gene expression are affected by metabolisms in 22. HoldenJK,LiH,JingQ,KangS,RichoJ,etal.(2013)Structuralandbiological Staphylococcusaureus.JBacteriol192:3068–3077. studiesonbacterialnitricoxidesynthaseinhibitors.ProcNatlAcadSciUSA 47. KojimaH,UranoY,KikuchiK,HiguchiT,HirataY,etal.(1999)Fluorescent 110:18127–18131. IndicatorsforImagingNitricOxideProduction.AngewChemIntEdEngl38: 23. TanK,LiH,ZhangR,GuM,ClancyST,etal.(2008)Structuresofopen(R) 3209–3212. andclose(T)statesofprephenatedehydratase(PDT)–implicationofallosteric 48. ClauditzA,ReschA,WielandKP,PeschelA,GotzF(2006)Staphyloxanthin regulationbyL-phenylalanine.JStructBiol162:94–107. playsaroleinthefitnessofStaphylococcusaureusanditsabilitytocopewith 24. Clewell DB, Flannagan SE, Jaworski DD (1995) Unconstrained bacterial oxidativestress.InfectImmun74:4950–4953. promiscuity: the Tn916-Tn1545 family of conjugative transposons. Trends 49. Liu GY, Essex A, Buchanan JT, Datta V, Hoffman HM, et al. (2005) Microbiol3:229–236. Staphylococcusaureusgoldenpigmentimpairsneutrophilkillingandpromotes 25. Bruckner R (1997) Gene replacement in Staphylococcus carnosus and virulencethroughitsantioxidantactivity.JExpMed202:209–215. Staphylococcusxylosus.FEMSMicrobiolLett151:1–8. 50. Mishra NN, Liu GY, Yeaman MR, Nast CC, Proctor RA, et al. (2011) 26. GroicherKH,FirekBA,FujimotoDF,BaylesKW(2000)TheStaphylococcus Carotenoid-relatedalterationofcellmembranefluidityimpactsStaphylococcus aureus lrgAB operon modulates murein hydrolase activity and penicillin aureussusceptibilitytohostdefensepeptides.AntimicrobAgentsChemother55: tolerance.JBacteriol182:1794–1801. 526–531. 27. Shafer WM, Iandolo JJ (1979) Genetics of staphylococcal enterotoxin B in 51. Chamberlain NR, Mehrtens BG, Xiong Z, Kapral FA, Boardman JL, et al. methicillin-resistant isolates of Staphylococcus aureus.InfectImmun25:902– (1991)Correlationofcarotenoidproduction,decreasedmembranefluidity,and 911. resistancetooleicacidkillinginStaphylococcusaureus18Z.InfectImmun59: 28. Schenk S, Laddaga RA (1992) Improved method for electroporation of 4332–4337. Staphylococcusaureus.FEMSMicrobiolLett73:133–138. 52. Walter MH, Strack D (2011) Carotenoids and their cleavage products: 29. Sullivan MA, Yasbin RE, Young FE (1984) Newshuttlevectors for Bacillus biosynthesisandfunctions.NatProdRep28:663–692. subtilisandEscherichiacoliwhichallowrapiddetectionofinsertedfragments. 53. GriffithOW,StuehrDJ(1995)Nitricoxidesynthases:propertiesandcatalytic Gene29:21–26. mechanism.AnnuRevPhysiol57:707–736. PLOSONE | www.plosone.org 13 October2014 | Volume 9 | Issue 10 | e108868 <BLANKLINE> --- PAGE 14 --- <BLANKLINE> Staphylococcusaureusnos-pdtOperon 54. GabrI,PatelRP,SymonsMCR,WilsonMT(1995)NovelReactionsofNitric 63. Chang MW, Toghrol F, Bentley WE (2007) Toxicogenomic response to OxideinBiologicalSystems.JChemSoc,ChemCommun:915–916. chlorination includes induction of major virulence genes in Staphylococcus 55. Kojima H, Nakatsubo N, Kikuchi K, Kawahara S, Kirino Y, et al. (1998) aureus.EnvironSciTechnol41:7570–7575. Detection and imaging of nitric oxide with novel fluorescent indicators: 64. Reiss S, Pane-Farre J, Fuchs S, Francois P, Liebeke M, et al. (2012) Global diaminofluoresceins.AnalChem70:2446–2453. analysisoftheStaphylococcusaureusresponsetomupirocin.AntimicrobAgents 56. Kojima H, Sakurai K, Kikuchi K, Kawahara S, Kirino Y, et al. (1998) Chemother56:787–804. Developmentofafluorescentindicatorfornitricoxidebasedonthefluorescein 65. PietiainenM,FrancoisP,HyyrylainenHL,TangomoM,SassV,etal.(2009) chromophore.ChemPharmBull(Tokyo)46:373–375. TranscriptomeanalysisoftheresponsesofStaphylococcusaureustoantimicro57. GusarovI,StarodubtsevaM,WangZQ,McQuadeL,LippardSJ,etal.(2008) bial peptides and characterization of the roles of vraDE and vraSR in Bacterialnitric-oxidesynthasesoperatewithoutadedicatedredoxpartner.JBiol antimicrobialresistance.BMCGenomics10:429. Chem283:13140–13147. 66. Neuman RE, Mc CT (1958) Growth-promoting properties of pyruvate oxal58. Lim MH, Lippard SJ (2006) Fluorescent nitric oxide detection by copper acetate,andalpha-ketoglutarateforisolatedWalkercarcinosarcoma256cells. complexesbearinganthracenylanddansylfluorophoreligands.InorgChem45: ProcSocExpBiolMed98:303–306. 8980–8989. 67. O’Donnell-TormeyJ,NathanCF,LanksK,DeBoerCJ,delaHarpeJ(1987) 59. LimMH,XuD,LippardSJ(2006)Visualizationofnitricoxideinlivingcellsby Secretionofpyruvate.Anantioxidantdefenseofmammaliancells.JExpMed acopper-basedfluorescentprobe.NatChemBiol2:375–380. 165:500–514. 60. NagarajanV, ElasriMO (2007) SAMMD: Staphylococcus aureus microarray 68. HanahanD(1983)StudiesontransformationofEscherichiacoliwithplasmids. meta-database.BMCGenomics8:351. JMolBiol166:557–580. 61. Sharma-KuinkelBK,MannEE,AhnJS,KuechenmeisterLJ,DunmanPM,et al.(2009)TheStaphylococcusaureusLytSRtwo-componentregulatorysystem 69. KreiswirthBN,LofdahlS,BetleyMJ,O’ReillyM,SchlievertPM,etal.(1983) affectsbiofilmformation.JBacteriol191:4767–4775. Thetoxicshocksyndromeexotoxinstructuralgeneisnotdetectablytransmitted 62. MichelA,AgererF,HauckCR,HerrmannM,UllrichJ,etal.(2006)Global byaprophage.Nature305:709–712. regulatory impact of ClpP protease of Staphylococcus aureus on regulons 70. GillaspyAF,HickmonSG,SkinnerRA,ThomasJR,NelsonCL,etal.(1995) involved in virulence, oxidative stress response, autolysis, and DNA repair. Role of the accessory gene regulator (agr) in pathogenesis of staphylococcal JBacteriol188:5783–5796. osteomyelitis.InfectImmun63:3373–3380. PLOSONE | www.plosone.org 14 October2014 | Volume 9 | Issue 10 | e108868